port there are no limiting effects of a few material layers for healthy individuals,* although the unpleasant sensation of feeling warmer on the face is largely unavoidable. The same may not be true for others with weaker lungs or obstructive conditions such as asthma and COPD, where more studies are already underway. In countries such and New Zealand, the compulsory wearing of face masks has greatly contributed to public health measures used to successfully control the infectious spread of the COVID-19 virus. The mandatory wearing in certain settings where social distancing is not possible or when exercise is occurring has contributed to suppression of the pandemic in this part of the world. 1092 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. The bony and cartilaginous framework of the nose help to keep the vestibule and nasal cavity patent, that is, open or unobstructed. The nasal cavity is divided into a larger, inferior respiratory region and a smaller, superior olfactory region. The respiratory region is lined with pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium with numerous goblet cells, which is frequently called the respiratory epithelium (see table 4.1). The anterior portion of the nasal cavity just inside the nostrils, called the nasal vestibule, is surrounded by cartilage; the superior part of the nasal cavity is surrounded by bone. When air enters the nostrils, it passes first through the vestibule, which is lined by skin containing coarse hairs that filter out large dust particles. Three shelves formed by projections of the superior, middle, and inferior nasal conchae extend out of each lateral wall of the nasal cavity. The conchae, almost reaching the nasal septum, subdivide each side of the nasal cavity into a series of groovelike air passageways - the superior, middle, and inferior nasal meatuses (mé-A-tus-éz = openings or passages; singular is meatus). Mucous membrane lines the nasal cavity and its shelves. The arrangement of conchae and meatuses increases surface area in the internal nose and prevents dehydration by trapping water droplets during exhalation. As inhaled air whirls around the conchae and meatuses, it is warmed by blood in the capillaries. Mucous secreted by the goblet cells moistens the air and traps dust particles. Drainage from the nasolacrimal ducts also helps moisten the air, and is sometimes assisted by secretions from the paranasal sinuses. The cilia move the mucous and trapped dust particles towards the pharynx, at which point they can be swallowed or spit out, thus removing the particles from the respiratory tract. The olfactory receptor cells, supporting cells, and basal cells lie in the respiratory region, which is near the superior nasal conchae and adjacent septum. These cells make up the olfactory epithelium. It contains cilia but no goblet cells. Respiratory structure: the head and neck. As air passes through the nose, it is warmed, filtered, and moistened; and olfaction occurs. BONY FRAMEWORK: Frontal bone Nasal bones Maxilla CARTILAGINOUS FRAMEWORK: --> Lateral nasal cartilages Septal cartilage Alar cartilage Dense fibrous connective and adipose tissue (a) Anterolateral view of nose showing bony and cartilaginous frameworks © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. <- Parasagittal plane |" SUPERIOR MIDDLE Frontal sinus NASAL MEATUSES + Frontal bone OLFACTORY EPITHELIUM Sphenoid bone Sphenoidal sinus INTERNAL NARIS. Pharyngeal tonsil NASOPHARYNX SUPERIOR | MIDDLE - | NASAL INFERIOR _| CONCHAE Opening g 2 - NASAL VESTIBULE = EXTERNAL NARIS Uvula : . ~ Maxilla Palatine tonsil . Oral cavity FAUCES Palatine bone OROPHARYNX EPIGLOTTIS LARYNGOPHARYNX Soft palate Lingual tonsil Mandible Hyoid bone ESTBULAR FOLD (false vocal cord) VOCAL FOLD (true vocal cord) LARYNX Regions of