s. Due to the influence of androgens (male sex © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. hormones), vocal folds are usually thicker and longer in males than in females, and therefore they vibrate more slowly. This is why a man's voice generally has a lower range of pitch than that of a woman. Sound originates from the vibration of the vocal folds, but other structures are necessary for converting the sound into recognisable speech. The pharynx, mouth, nasal cavity, and paranasal sinuses all act as resonating chambers that give the voice its human and individual quality. We produce the vowel sounds by constricting and relaxing the muscles in the wall of the pharynx. Muscles of the face, tongue, and lips help us enunciate words. Whispering is accomplished by closing all but the posterior portion of the rima glottidis. Because the vocal folds do not vibrate during whispering, there is no pitch to this form of speech. However, we can still produce intelligible speech while whispering by changing the shape of the oral cavity as we enunciate. As the size of the oral cavity changes, its resonance qualities change, which imparts a vowel-like pitch to the air as it rushes towards the lips. Trachea The trachea (TRA-ké-a = sturdy), or windpipe, is a tubular passageway for air that is about 12 cm (5 in.) long and 2.5 cm (1 in.) in diameter. It is located anterior to the oesophagus (figure 23.6) and extends from the larynx to the superior border of the fifth thoracic vertebra (TS), where it divides into right and left primary bronchi (see figure 23.7). Location of the trachea in relation to the oesophagus. The trachea is anterior to the oesophagus and extends from the larynx to the superior border of the fifth thoracic vertebra. Oesophagus Trachea ANTERIOR - | Transverse plane Tracheal cartilage Right lateral lobe of thyroid gland Left lateral \ be muscle in fibromuscular membrane thyroid gland Oesophagus POSTERIOR Superior view of transverse section of thyroid gland, trachea, and oesophagus QUESTION What is the benefit of not having complete rings of tracheal cartilage between the trachea and the oesophagus? The layers of the tracheal wall, from deep to superficial, are the (1) mucosa, (2) submucosa, (3) hyaline cartilage, and (4) adventitia (composed of areolar connective tissue). The mucosa of the trachea consists of an epithelial layer of pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium and an underlying layer of lamina propria that contains elastic and reticular fibres. It provides the same protection against dust as the membrane lining the nasal cavity and larynx. The submucosa consists of areolar connective tissue that contains seromucous glands and their ducts. The 16-20 incomplete, horizontal rings of hyaline cartilage resemble the letter C, are stacked one above another, and are connected by dense connective tissue. They may be felt through the skin inferior to the larynx. The open part of each C-shaped cartilage ring faces posteriorly towards the oesophagus (figure 23.6) and is spanned by a fibromuscular membrane. Within this membrane are transverse smooth muscle fibres, called the trachealis muscle (tra-ké-A-lis), and elastic connective tissue that allow the diameter of the trachea to change subtly during inhalation and exhalation, which is important in maintaining efficient airflow. The solid C-shaped cartilage rings provide a semirigid support to maintain patency so that the tracheal wall does not collapse inward (especially during inhalation) and obstruct the air passageway. The adventitia of the trachea consists of areolar connective tissue that joins the trachea to surrounding tissues. 1100 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. CLINICAL CONNECTION Tracheotomy and intubation Several conditions may block ai