ic baroreceptors, and the carotid bodies are located close to the caroti sinus baroreceptors. Recall from chapter 21 that baroreceptors are sensory receptors that monitor bloo pressure.) These chemoreceptors are part of the peripheral nervous system and are sensitive to changes ,, H*, and Pco, in the blood. Axons of sensory neurons from the aortic bodies are part of the vagus (X) nerves, and those from the carotid bodies are part of the right and left glossopharyngeal (IX) nerves. © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Recall from chapter 17 that olfactory receptors for the sense of smell and gustatory receptor cells for the sense of taste are also chemoreceptors. Both respond to external stimuli. | FicuRi E 23.25 | Locations of peripheral chemoreceptors. Chemoreceptors are sensory neurons that respond to changes in the levels of certain chemicals in the body. Medulla oblongata Sensory axons in glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve Internal carotid artery CAROTID BODY External carotid artery Carotid sinus Sensory axons in vagus (X) nerve Common carotid artery Arch of aorta AORTIC BODIES QUESTION Which chemicals stimulate peripheral chemoreceptors? Because CO, is lipid-soluble, it easily diffuses into cells where, in the presence of carbonic anhydrase, it combines with water (H,O) to form carbonic acid (H,CO3). Carbonic acid quickly breaks down into H* and HCO 3°. Thus, an increase in CO, in the blood causes an increase in H* inside cells, and a decrease in CO, causes a decrease in H*. 1132 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Normally, the Pco, in arterial blood is 40 mmHg. If even a slight increase , occurs - a condition called hypercapnia (hi! -per-KAP-né-a) or hypercarbia - the central chemoreceptors are stimulated and respond vigorously to the resulting increase in H* level. The peripheral chemoreceptors also are stimulated by both the high Pco, and the rise in H*. In addition, the peripheral chemoreceptors (but not the central chemoreceptors) respond to a deficiency of O,. When Po, in arterial blood falls from a normal level of 100 mmHg but is still above 50 mmHg, the peripheral chemoreceptors are stimulated. Severe deficiency of O, depresses activity of the central chemoreceptors and DRG, which then do not respond well to any inputs and send fewer impulses to the muscles of inhalation. As the breathing rate decreases or breathing ceases altogether, Po, falls lower and lower, establishing a positive feedback cycle with a possibly fatal result. The chemoreceptors participate in a negative feedback system that regulates the levels of CO, O>, and H* in the blood (figure 23.26). As a result of increased Poo, decreased pH (increased H*), or decreased Po, input from the central and peripheral chemoreceptors causes the DRG to become highly active, and the rate and depth of breathing increase. Rapid and deep breathing, called hyperventilation, allows the inhalation of more O, and exhalation of more CO, until Peg, and H* are lowered to normal. If arterial Peo, is lower than 40 mmHg - a condition called hypocapnia or hypocarbia - the central and peripheral chemoreceptors are not stimulated, and stimulatory impulses are not sent to the DRG. As a result, DRG neurons set their own moderate pace until CO, accumulates and the Pco, rises to 40 mmHg. DRG neurons are more strongly stimulated when Pco, is rising above normal than when Po, is falling below normal. As a result, people who hyperventilate voluntarily and cause hypocapnia can hold their breath for an unusually long period. Swimmers were once encouraged to hyperventilate just before diving in to compete. However, this practice is risky because the O, level may fall dangerously low and cause fainting before the Pco, rises high enough to stimulate inhalation. If you 