 a trap door. During swallowing, the pharynx and larynx rise. Elevation of the pharynx widens it to receive food or drink; elevation of the larynx causes the epiglottis to move down and form a lid over the glottis, closing it off. The glottis consists of a pair of folds of mucous membrane, the vocal folds (true vocal cords) in the larynx, and the space between them called the rima 1096 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. glottidis (RI-ma GLOT-ti-dis). The closing of the larynx in this way during swallowing routes liquids and foods into the oesophagus and keeps them out of the larynx and airways. When small particles of dust, smoke, food, or liquids pass into the larynx, a cough reflex occurs, usually expelling the material. The cricoid cartilage (KRI-koyd = ringlike) is a ring of hyaline cartilage that forms the inferior wall of the larynx. It is attached to the first ring of cartilage of the trachea by the cricotracheal ligament (kri'- k6-TRA-ké-al). The thyroid cartilage is connected to the cricoid cartilage by the cricothyroid ligament. The cricoid cartilage is the landmark for making an emergency airway called a tracheotomy (see 'Clinical connection: Tracheotomy and intubation'). The paired arytenoid cartilages (ar'-i-TE-noyd = ladlelike) are triangular pieces of mostly hyaline cartilage located at the posterior, superior border of the cricoid cartilage. They form synovial joints with the cricoid cartilage and have a wide range of mobility. The paired corniculate cartilages (kor-NIK-ia-lat = shaped like a small horn), horn-shaped pieces of elastic cartilage, are located at the apex of each arytenoid cartilage. The paired cuneiform cartilages (KU- né-i-form = wedge-shaped), club-shaped elastic cartilages anterior to the corniculate cartilages, support the vocal folds and lateral aspects of the epiglottis. The larynx. The larynx is composed of nine pieces of cartilage. EPIGLOTTIS 2 bone __-_-_ membrane EPIGLOTTIS: Larynx Thyroid gland CORNICULATE CARTILAGE. THYROID CARTILAGE (Adam's apple) ARYTENOID CARTILAGE Cricothyroid ligament CRICOID CARTILAGE Cricotracheal ligament Thyroid gland Parathyroid glands (4) Tracheal cartilage (a) Anterior view (b) Posterior view EPIGLOTTIS Sagittal plane Thyrohyoid membrane ~<- Thyrohyoid membrane Fat body VESTIBULAR FOLD (false vocal cord) THYROID CARTILAGE VOCAL FOLD (true vocal cord) <--Y-_ Cricothyroid ligament CUNEIFORM CARTILAGE CORNICULATE CARTILAGE ARYTENOID CARTILAGE LARYNGEAL VENTRICLE CRICOID CARTILAGE <----- Cricotracheal ligament Tracheal cartilage -------_> (c) Sagittal section © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. EPIGLOTTIC CARTILAGE Hyoid bone Thyrohyoid muscle Thyrohyoid VESTIBULAR FOLD membrane RIMA VESTIBULI LARYNGEAL (false vocal cord) VOCAL FOLD (true vocal cord) Vocalis muscle VENTRICLE THYROID constctor muscle CARTILAGE Sternothyroid muscle RIMA GLOTTIDIS Lateral cricoarytenoid CRICOID muscle CARTILAGE ; ; Cricotracheal Cricothyroid muscle ligament First tracheal cartilage TRACHEA Thyroid gland Parathyroid gland QUESTION How does the epiglottis prevent aspiration of foods and liquids? The lining of the larynx superior to the vocal folds is nonkeratinised stratified squamous epithelium. The lining of the larynx inferior to the vocal folds is pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium consisting of ciliated columnar cells, goblet cells, and basal cells. The mucous produced by the goblet cells helps trap dust not removed in the upper passages. The cilia in the upper respiratory tract move mucous and trapped particles down towards the pharynx; the cilia in the lower respiratory tract move them up towards the pharynx. CLINICAL CONNECTION Laryngitis and cancer of the larynx Laryngitis is an inflammation of the larynx that is most often caused b