out | cm (0.4 in.), producing a pressure difference of 1-3 mmHg and the inhalation of about 500 mL of air. In strenuous breathing, the diaphragm may descend 10 cm (4 in.), which produces a pressure difference of 100 mmHg and the inhalation of 2-3 litres of air. Contraction of the diaphragm is responsible for about 75% of the air that enters the lungs during quiet breathing. Advanced pregnancy, excessive obesity, or confining abdominal clothing can prevent complete descent of the diaphragm. 1110 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Boyle's law. The volume of a gas varies inversely with its pressure. Piston Pressure [ gauge | | Volume = 1 litre Volume = 1/2 litre Pressure = 1 atm Pressure QUESTION If the volume is decreased from 1 litre to '/, litre, how would the pressure change? Muscles of inhalation and exhalation. The pectoralis minor muscle (not shown here) is illustrated in figure 11.14a. During normal, quiet inhalation, the diaphragm and external intercostals contract, the lungs expand, and air moves into the lungs; during normal, quiet exhalation, the diaphragm and external intercostals relax and the lungs recoil, forcing air out of the lungs. Sternum: Exhalation "<- Inhalation MUSCLES OF INHALATION Sternocleidomastoid Scalenes 4 . Diaphragm: §- Internal : A . External intercostals intercostals Inhalation Diaphragm External b) Changes in size of thoracic cavi oblique (©) 9 ty during inhalation and exhalation Internal oblique Transversus abdominis Rectus abdominis (a) Muscles of inhalation (left); muscles of exhalation (right); (c) During inhalation, the lower ribs (7-10) move arrows indicate the direction of muscle contraction upward and outward like the handle on a bucket QUESTION Right now, what is the main muscle that is powering your breathing? The next most important muscles of inhalation are the external intercostals. When these muscles contract, they elevate the ribs. As a result, there is an increase in the anteroposterior and lateral diameters © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. of the chest cavity. Contraction of the external intercostals is responsible for about 25% of the air that enters the lungs during normal quiet breathing. During quiet inhalations, the pressure between the two pleural layers in the pleural cavity, called intrapleural (intrathoracic) pressure, is always subatmospheric (lower than atmospheric pressure). Just before inhalation, it is about 4 mmHg less than the atmospheric pressure, or about 756 mmHg at an atmospheric pressure of 760 mmHg (figure 23.14). As the diaphragm and external intercostals contract and the overall size of the thoracic cavity increases, the volume of the pleural cavity also increases, which causes intrapleural pressure to decrease to about 754 mmHg. During expansion of the thorax, the parietal and visceral pleurae normally adhere tightly because of the subatmospheric pressure between them and because of the surface tension created by their moist adjoining surfaces. As the thoracic cavity expands, the parietal pleura lining the cavity is pulled outward in all directions, and the visceral pleura and lungs are pulled along with it. | FIGURE 23.14 | Pressure changes in pulmonary ventilatio: D uring inhalation, the diaphragm contracts, the chest expands, the lungs are pulled outward, and alveolar pressure decreases. During exhalation, the diaphragm relaxes, the lungs recoil inward, and alveolar pressure increases, forcing air out of the lungs. ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE = 760 mmHg ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE = 760 mmHg 2. During inhalation, the diaphragm contracts and the external intercostals contract. The chest cavity expands, and the alveolar pressure drops. PRESSURE = below atmospheric pressure. 758 mmHg Air flows into the lungs in response to the pressur