s of location and function: (1) the medullary respiratory centre in the medulla oblongata and (2) the pontine respiratory group in the pons (figure 23.23). Medullary respiratory centre The medullary respiratory centre is made up of two collections of neurons called the dorsal respiratory group (DRG), formerly called the inspiratory area, and the ventral respiratory group (VRG), formerly called the expiratory area. During normal quiet breathing, neurons of the DRG generate impulses to the diaphragm via the phrenic nerves and the external intercostal muscles via the intercostal nerves (figure 23.24a). These impulses are released in bursts, which begin weakly, increase in strength for about two seconds, and then stop altogether. When the nerve impulses reach the diaphragm and external intercostals, the muscles contract and inhalation occurs. When the DRG becomes inactive after two seconds, the diaphragm and external intercostals relax for about three seconds, allowing the passive recoil of the lungs and thoracic wall. Then, the cycle repeats itself. Located in the VRG is a cluster of neurons called the pre-Bétzinger complex (BOT-zin-ger) that is believed to be important in the generation of the rhythm of breathing (see figure 23.23a). This rhythm generator, analogous to the one in the heart, is composed of pacemaker cells that set the basic rhythm of breathing. The exact mechanism of these pacemaker cells is unknown and is the topic of much ongoing research. However, it is thought that the pacemaker cells provide input to the DRG, driving the rate at which DRG neurons fire action potentials. The remaining neurons of the VRG do not participate in normal quiet breathing. The VRG becomes activated when forceful breathing is required, such as during exercise, when playing a wind instrument, or at high altitudes. During forceful inhalation (figure 23.24b), nerve impulses from the DRG not only stimulate the diaphragm and external intercostal muscles to contract, they also activate neurons of the VRG involved in forceful inhalation to send impulses to the accessory muscles of inhalation (sternocleidomastoid, scalenes, and pectoralis minor). Contraction of these muscles results in forceful inhalation. During forceful exhalation (figure 23.24b), the DRG is inactive along with the neurons of the VRG that result in forceful inhalation, but neurons of the VRG involved in forceful exhalation send nerve impulses to the accessory muscles of exhalation (internal intercostals, external oblique, internal oblique, transversus abdominis, and rectus abdominis). Contraction of these muscles results in forceful exhalation. © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Locations of areas of the respiratory centre. | FIGURE 29.2 | T he respiratory centre is composed of neurons in the medullary respiratory centre in the medulla plus the pontine respiratory group in the pons. Midbrain Respiratory centre: Pontine respiratory group Medullary respiratory centre: Pons Pre-Bétzinger complex Dorsal respiratory group Ventral respiratory group Medulla oblongata (a) Sagittal section of brain stem Intercostal nerve Phrenic nerve External intercostal muscles Diaphragm Anterior superficial view Anterior deep view (b) Musculature of thorax QUESTION Which area contains neurons that are active and then inactive in a repeating cycle? Pontine respiratory group The pontine respiratory group (PRG) (PON-tén), formerly called the pneumotaxic area, is a collection of neurons in the pons (see figure 23.23a). The neurons in the PRG are active during inhalation and exhalation. The PRG transmits nerve impulses to the DRG in the medulla. The PRG may play a role in both inhalation and exhalation by modifying the basic rhythm of breathing generated by the VRG, as when exercising, speaking, or sleeping. CHECKPOINT 27. How does the medullary respiratory centre regulate breathing? 28. How is the ponti