faint on land you may suffer bumps and bruises, but if you faint in the water you could drown. Proprioceptor stimulation of breathing As soon as you start exercising, your rate and depth of breathing increase, even before changes ,, P¢o,, or H* level occur. The main stimulus for these quick changes in respiratory effort is input from proprioceptors, which monitor movement of joints and muscles. Nerve impulses from the proprioceptors stimulate the DRG of the medulla. At the same time, axon collaterals (branches) of upper motor neurons that originate in the primary motor cortex (precentral gyrus) also feed excitatory impulses into the DRG. The inflation reflex Similar to those in the blood vessels, stretch-sensitive receptors called baroreceptors or stretch receptors are located in the walls of bronchi and bronchioles. When these receptors become stretched during overinflation of the lungs, nerve impulses are sent along the vagus (X) nerves to the dorsal respiratory group (DRG) in the medullary respiratory centre. In response, the DRG is inhibited and the diaphragm and external intercostals relax. As a result, further inhalation is stopped and exhalation begins. As air leaves the lungs during exhalation, the lungs deflate and the stretch receptors are no longer stimulated. Thus, the DRG is no longer inhibited, and a new inhalation begins. This reflex is referred to as the inflation reflex -Breuer reflex (HER-ing BROY-er). In infants, the reflex appears to function in normal breathing. In adults, however, the reflex is not activated until tidal volume (normally 500 mL) reaches more than 1500 mL. Therefore, the reflex in adults is a protective mechanism that prevents excessive inflation of the lungs, for example, during severe exercise, rather than a key component in the normal control of breathing. Other influences on breathing Other factors that contribute to regulation of breathing include the following. ¢ Limbic system stimulation. Anticipation of activity or emotional anxiety may stimulate the limbic system, which then sends excitatory input to the DRG, increasing the rate and depth of breathing. ¢ Temperature. An increase in body temperature, as occurs during a fever or vigorous muscular exercise, increases the rate of breathing. A decrease in body temperature decreases breathing rate. A sudden cold stimulus (such as plunging into cold water) causes temporary apnea (AP-né-a; a- = without; -pnea = breath), an absence of breathing. ¢ Pain. A sudden, severe pain brings about brief apnea, but a prolonged somatic pain increases breathing rate. Visceral pain may slow the rate, and alter depth, of breathing. ¢ Stretching the anal sphincter muscle. This action increases the breathing rate and is sometimes used to stimulate respiration in a newborn baby or a person who has stopped breathing. © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. ¢ Irritation of airways. Physical or chemical irritation of the pharynx or larynx brings about an immediate cessation of breathing followed by coughing or sneezing. ¢ Blood pressure. The carotid and aortic baroreceptors that detect changes in blood pressure have a small effect on breathing. A sudden rise in blood pressure decreases the rate of breathing, and a drop in blood pressure increases the breathing rate. | FIGURE 23.26 | Regulation of breathing in response to changes in blood Peco,» 3 and pH (H*) via negative feedback control. An increase in arterial blood Pco, stimulates the dorsal respiratory group (DRG). Disrupts homeostasis by increasing | I to homeostasis when response brings arterial blood Pco,, PH, and Po, back to normal Nerve impulses. Nerve impulses EFFECTORS Muscles of inhalation and exhalation contract more forcefully and more frequently (hyperventilation) [ ! ! / / QUESTION What is the normal arterial blood Poo? 1134 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not fo