re listed in table 23.2. All of these movements are reflexes, but some of them also can be initiated voluntarily. TABLE 23.2 Modified breathing movements A deep inhalation through the widely opened mouth producing an exaggerated depression of the mandible. It may be stimulated by drowsiness, or someone else's yawning, but the precise cause remains open and the vocal folds vibrate; accompanied by characteristic facial expressions and Movement Coughing A long-drawn and deep inhalation followed by a complete closure of the rima glottidis, which results in a strong exhalation that suddenly pushes the rima glottidis open and sends a blast of air through the upper respiratory passages. Stimulus for this reflex act may be a foreign body lodged in the larynx, trachea, or epiglottis. Sneezing Spasmodic contraction of muscles of exhalation that forcefully expels air through the nose and mouth. Stimulus may be an irritation of the nasal mucosa. Sighing A long-drawn and deep inhalation immediately followed by a shorter but forceful exhalation. Yawning is unknown. Sobbing Aseries of convulsive inhalations followed by a single prolonged exhalation. The rima glottidis closes earlier than normal after each inhalation so only a little air enters the lungs with each inhalation. Crying An inhalation followed by many short convulsive exhalations, during which the rima glottidis tears. Laughing The same basic movements as crying, but the rhythm of the movements and the facial expres- sions usually differ from those of crying. Laughing and crying are sometimes indistinguishable. Hiccupping Spasmodic contraction of the diaphragm followed by a spasmodic closure of the rima glottidis, which produces a sharp sound on inhalation. Stimulus is usually irritation of the sensory nerve endings of the gastrointestinal tract. Valsalva Forced exhalation against a closed rima glottidis as may occur during periods of straining while (val-SAL-va) defecating. manoeuver Pressurising the middle ear The nose and mouth are held closed and air from the lungs is forced through the auditory tube into the middle ear. Employed by those snorkelling or scuba diving during descent to equalise the pressure of the middle ear with that of the external environment. CLINICAL CONNECTION Respiratory muscle training for COPD patients Obstructive disorders are broadly characterised by alter- ations to the conducting airways, increasing the resis- tance and making rate of airflow difficult to achieve. In 2011-12 , the number of hospitalisations for COPD approached 60 000. Although deaths have reduced since the 1970s, there is increased need to improve quality of life in those people now living longer. As airways narrow and the lungs become obstructed from air ventilating the lungs, the effort to breathe, even at rest, can become laborious and difficult. Ventilation of the lungs requires basic principles of pressure and volume, and this work is greater for people with COPD due to the obstruction to airflow. Like any skeletal muscle, respiratory muscles are not protected from fatigue. Resistive breathing devices are used with the person in resting state, usually sitting down, and breathing through the mouth piece. The effort required to inhale or exhale can be adjusted to target the diaphragm and intercostal muscles. Studies in patients are now demonstrating that specific inspiratory and expiratory muscle training stimu- lates the respiratory muscle function. In COPD patients, the respiratory training effects are now underpinning improve- ment to exercise tolerance and reduced effort of breathing. The impact of stronger and less fatigable respiratory mus- cles can potentially mean that people living with COPD can improve their quality of life and carry out more activities of daily living on their own.' © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. CHECKPOINT 12. What are the basic differences among pul