tubes), and the opening into the oropharynx. The posterior wall also contains the pharyngeal tonsil (fa-RIN-je-al), or adenoid. Through the internal nares, the nasopharynx receives air from the nasal cavity along with packages of dust-laden mucous. The nasopharynx is lined with pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium, and the cilia move the mucous down towards the most inferior part of the pharynx. The nasopharynx also exchanges small amounts of air with the auditory tubes to equalise air pressure between the middle ear and the atmosphere. The intermediate portion of the pharynx, the oropharynx, lies posterior to the oral cavity and extends from the soft palate inferiorly to the level of the hyoid bone. It has only one opening into it, the fauces (FAW-séz = throat), the opening from the mouth. This portion of the pharynx has both respiratory and digestive functions, serving as a common passageway for air, food, and drink. Because the oropharynx is subject to abrasion by food particles, it is lined with nonkeratinised stratified squamous epithelium. Two pairs of tonsils, the palatine and lingual tonsils, are found in the oropharynx. The inferior portion of the pharynx, the laryngopharynx (la-RING-g6-far-ingks), or hypopharynx, begins at the level of the hyoid bone. At its inferior end it opens into the oesophagus (food tube) posteriorly and the larynx (voice box) anteriorly. Like the oropharynx, the laryngopharynx is both a respiratory and a digestive pathway and is lined by nonkeratinised stratified squamous epithelium. CLINICAL CONNECTION Tonsillectomy patient basis. Tonsillectomies are performed in individuals Tonsillectomy (ton-si-LEK-t6-mé; -ektome = excision or to who have frequent tonsillitis (ton'-si-LI-tis); that is, inflam- cut out) is surgical removal of the tonsils. The procedure mation of the tonsils; tonsils that develop an abscess or is usually performed under general anaesthesia on an out- tumour; or tonsils that obstruct breathing during sleep. Larynx The larynx (LAR-ingks), or voice box, is a short passageway that connects the laryngopharynx with the trachea. It lies in the midline of the neck anterior to the oesophagus and the fourth through sixth cervical vertebrae (C4-C6). The wall of the larynx is composed of nine pieces of cartilage (figure 23.4). Three occur singly (thyroid cartilage, epiglottis, and cricoid cartilage), and three occur in pairs (arytenoid, cuneiform, and corniculate cartilages). Of the paired cartilages, the arytenoid cartilages are the most important because they influence changes in position and tension of the vocal folds (true vocal cords for speech). The extrinsic muscles of the larynx connect the cartilages to other structures in the throat; the intrinsic muscles connect the cartilages to one another. The cavity of the larynx is the space that extends from the entrance into the larynx down to the inferior border of the cricoid cartilage (described shortly). The portion of the cavity of the larynx above the vestibular folds (false vocal cords) is called the laryngeal vestibule. The portion of the cavity of the larynx below the vocal folds is called the infraglottic cavity (infra- = below) (figure 23.4d). The thyroid cartilage (Adam's apple) consists of two fused plates of hyaline cartilage that form the anterior wall of the larynx and give it a triangular shape. It is present in both males and females but is usually larger in males due to the influence of male sex hormones on its growth during puberty. The ligament that connects the thyroid cartilage to the hyoid bone is called the thyrohyoid membrane. The epiglottis (epi- = over; -glottis = tongue) is a large, leaf-shaped piece of elastic cartilage that is covered with epithelium (see also figure 23.2b). The 'stem' of the epiglottis is the tapered inferior portion that is attached to the anterior rim of the thyroid cartilage. The broad superior 'leaf' portion of the epiglottis is unattached and is free to move up and down like