chioles represent the end of the conducting zone of the respiratory system. This extensive branching from the trachea through the terminal bronchioles resembles an inverted tree and is commonly referred to as the bronchial tree. As the branching becomes more extensive in the bronchial tree, several structural changes may be noted. 1. The mucous membrane in the bronchial tree changes from pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium in the main bronchi, lobar bronchi, and segmental bronchi to ciliated simple columnar epithelium with some goblet cells in larger bronchioles, to mostly ciliated simple cuboidal epithelium with no goblet cells in smaller bronchioles, to mostly nonciliated simple cuboidal epithelium in terminal bronchioles. Recall that ciliated epithelium of the respiratory membrane removes inhaled particles in two ways. Mucous produced by goblet cells traps the particles, and the cilia move the mucous and trapped particles towards the pharynx for removal. In regions where nonciliated simple cuboidal epithelium is present, inhaled particles are removed by macrophages. 2. Plates of cartilage gradually replace the incomplete rings of cartilage in main bronchi and finally disappear in the distal bronchioles. 3. As the amount of cartilage decreases, the amount of smooth muscle increases. Smooth muscle encircles the lumen in spiral bands and helps maintain patency. However, because there is no supporting cartilage, muscle spasms can close off the airways. This is what happens during an asthma attack, which can be a life-threatening situation. During exercise, activity in the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) increases and the adrenal medulla releases the hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine; both of these events cause relaxation of smooth muscle in the bronchioles, which dilates the airways. Because air reaches the alveoli more quickly, lung ventilation improves. The parasympathetic division of the ANS and mediators of allergic reactions such as histamine have the opposite effect, causing contraction of bronchiolar smooth muscle, which results in constriction of distal bronchioles. SPORT SPOTLIGHT Exercise training and the Australian bushfires of 2019-20 The Australian bushfires of 2019-20 dramatically impacted on the air quality of the east coast and millions - tralians were exposed to very poor air quality for several weeks. The immediate concern was raised for those more vulnerable groups with pre-existing respiratory disease, breathing limitations, and poor lung health. Undoubtedly, the detrimental effects of breathing in thousands of tiny air toxins was unquestionable. In the weeks to come, when it was evident that air quality would be poor for possibly months, questions were raised about the safety of healthy, active adults taking part in recreational activity and also elite athletes either training or competing in those conditions. The lungs perform many roles, beyond gas exchange, and these collectively are referred to the non-respiratory functions. As the barrier between the external and internal environments, the lungs'roles of filtering toxins and particles, and protecting against infection are critical. However, this delicate system, including ciliated epithelial tissue, immune cells, and mucous, can be overwhelmed by destruction and damage, even when the person is healthy and disease-free. Athletes will increase their ventilation, sometimes 20-25 fold, during vigorous and high-intensity training. This results in ventilation exceeding 200 L/min in athletes such as 1102 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. endurance runners and cyclists. In an environment of poor air quality, mass exposure to the detrimental particles in smoke-filled air can have both short- and long-term health implications. Immediate risks include bronchoconstriction (for example, a