r resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Table 23.3 summarises the stimuli that affect the rate and depth of breathing. TABLE 23.3. Summary of stimuli that affect breathing rate and depth Stimuli that increase breathing rate and depth Stimuli that decrease breathing rate and depth Voluntary hyperventilation controlled by cerebral cortex Voluntary hypoventilation controlled by cerebral cortex. and anticipation of activity by stimulation of limbic system. Increase in arterial blood Pog, above 40 mmHg (causes Decrease in arterial blood Poo, below 40 mmHg an increase in H*) detected by peripheral and central (causes a decrease in H*) detected by peripheral and chemoreceptors. central chemoreceptors. Decrease in arterial blood Po, from 105 mmHg in arterial blood Po, below 50 mmHg. 50 mmHg. Increased activity of proprioceptors. Decreased activity of proprioceptors. Increase in body temperature. Decrease in body temperature (decreases respiration rate), sudden cold stimulus (causes apnea). Prolonged pain. Severe pain (causes apnea). Decrease in blood pressure. Increase in blood pressure. Stretching of anal sphincter. Irritation of pharynx or larynx by touch or chemicals (causes brief apnea followed by coughing or sneezing). CHECKPOINT 29. How do the cerebral cortex, levels of CO, and Oz, proprioceptors, inflation reflex, temperature changes, pain, and irritation of the airways modify breathing? 23.7 Exercise and the respiratory system LEARNING OBJECTIVE 23.7 Describe the effects of exercise on the respiratory system. The respiratory and cardiovascular systems make adjustments in response to both the intensity and duration of exercise. The effects of exercise on the heart are discussed in chapter 20. Here we focus on how exercise affects the respiratory system. Recall that the heart pumps the same amount of blood to the lungs as to all the rest of the body. Thus, as cardiac output rises, the blood flow to the lungs, termed pulmonary perfusion, increases as well. In addition, the O, diffusing capacity, a measure of the rate at which O, can diffuse from alveolar air into the blood, may increase threefold during maximal exercise because more pulmonary capillaries become maximally perfused. As a result, there is a greater surface area available for diffusion of O, into pulmonary blood capillaries. When muscles contract during exercise, they consume large amounts of O, and produce large amounts of CO,. During vigorous exercise, 0, consumption and breathing both increase dramatically. At the onset of exercise, an abrupt increase in breathing is followed by a more gradual increase. With moderate exercise, the increase is due mostly to an increase in the depth of breathing rather than to increased breathing rate. When exercise is more strenuous, the frequency of breathing also increases. The abrupt increase in breathing at the start of exercise is due to neural changes that send excitatory impulses to the dorsal respiratory group (DRG) of the medullary respiratory centre in the medulla. These changes include (1) anticipation of the activity, which stimulates the limbic system; (2) sensory impulses from proprioceptors in muscles, tendons, and joints; and (3) motor impulses from the primary motor cortex (precentral gyrus). The more gradual increase in breathing during moderate exercise is due to chemical and physical changes in the bloodstream, including (1) slightly decreased Po,, due to increased O, consumption; (2) slightly increased Pco,: due to increased CO, production by contracting muscle fibres; and (3) increased temperature, due to liberation of more heat as more Oj is utilised. During strenuous exercise, HCO; buffers H* released by lactic acid in a reaction that liberates CO, which further increases P¢o,. © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. At the end of an exercise session, an abrupt dec