them in single file, which minimises the diffusion distance from an alveolar air space to haemoglobin inside red blood cells. Buildup of interstitial fluid between alveoli, as occurs in pulmonary oedema (see 'Disorders: Homeostatic imbalances' at the end of the chapter), slows the rate of gas exchange because it increases diffusion distance. ¢ Molecular weight and solubility of the gases. Because O, has a lower molecular weight than CO, it could be expected to diffuse across the respiratory membrane about 1.2 times faster. However, the solubility of CO, in the fluid portions of the respiratory membrane is about 24 times greater than that of O,. Taking both of these factors into account, net outward CO, diffusion occurs 20 times more rapidly than net inward O, diffusion. Consequently, when diffusion is slower than normal - for example, © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. in emphysema or pulmonary oedema - QO), insufficiency (hypoxia) typically occurs before there is significant retention of CO, (hypercapnia). CLINICAL CONNECTION Hypoxia Hypoxia (hI-POK-sé-a; hypo- = under) is a deficiency of O, at the tissue level. Based on the cause, we can classify hypoxia into four types, as follows. 1. Hypoxic hypoxia is caused by a low Po, in arterial blood as a result of high altitude, airway obstruction, or fluid in the lungs. 2. In anaemic hypoxia, too little functioning haemoglobin is present in the blood, which reduces O, transport 3. In ischemic hypoxia (is-KE-mik), blood flow to a tissue is so reduced that too little O, is delivered to it, even though P,, and oxyhaemoglobin levels are normal. 4. In histotoxic hypoxia (his-t6-TOK-sik), the blood delivers adequate O, to tissues, but the tissues are unable to use it properly because of the action of some toxic agent. One cause is cyanide poisoning, in which cyanide blocks an enzyme required for the use of O, during ATP synthesis. to tissue cells. Among the causes are hemorrhage, anaemia, and failure of haemoglobin to carry its normal complement , as in carbon monoxide poisoning. CHECKPOINT 20. Distinguish between Dalton's law and Henry's law and give a practical application of each. 21. How does the partial pressure of oxygen change as altitude changes? 22. What are the diffusion paths of oxygen and carbon dioxide during external and internal respiration? 23. What factors affect the rate of diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide? 23.5 Transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide LEARNING OBJECTIVE 23.5 Describe how the blood transports oxygen and carbon dioxide. As you have already learned, the blood transports gases between the lungs and body tissues. When O, and CO, enter the blood, certain chemical reactions occur that aid in gas transport and gas exchange. Oxygen transport Oxygen does not dissolve easily in water, so only about 1.5% of inhaled O, is dissolved in blood plasma, which is mostly water. About 98.5% of blood O, is bound to haemoglobin in red blood cells (figure 23.17). Each 100 mL of oxygenated blood contains the equivalent of 20 mL of gaseous O5. Using the percentages just given, the amount dissolved in the plasma is 0.3 mL and the amount bound to haemoglobin is 19.7 mL. The haem portion of haemoglobin contains four atoms of iron, each capable of binding to a molecule of O, (see figure 19.4b, c). Oxygen and haemoglobin bind in an easily reversible reaction to form oxyhaemoglobin. Binding of O Hb + OJ Hb-O, Reduced haemoglobin Oxygen _ Dissociation Oxyhaemoglobin (deoxy haemoglobin) of O, The 98.5% of the O, that is bound to haemoglobin is trapped inside RBCs, so only the dissolved O, (1.5%) can diffuse out of tissue capillaries into tissue cells. Thus, it is important to understand the factors that promote O, binding to and dissociation (separation) from haemoglobin. The relationship between haemoglobin and oxygen partial pressure The most important factor that determines how muc