e 23.9e). These structures are held together by the pleura and connective tissue and constitute the root of the lung. Medially, the left lung also contains a concavity, the cardiac notch, in which the apex of the heart lies. Due to the space occupied by the heart, the left lung is about 10% smaller than the right lung. Although the right lung is thicker and broader, it is also somewhat shorter than the left lung because the diaphragm is higher on the right side, accommodating the liver that lies inferior to it. Surface anatomy of the lungs. The oblique fissure divides the left lung into two lobes. The oblique and horizontal fissures divide the right lung into three lobes. First rib Apex of lung Left lung Base of lung Pleural cavity Pleura (a) Anterior view of lungs and pleurae in thorax Apex Superior lobe ANTERIOR View (b) (c) Oblique fissure Horizontal fissure Oblique fissure Inferior lobe POSTERIOR Cardiac notch Middle lobe Inferior lobe POSTERIOR Base b) Lateral view of right lung (c) Lateral view of left lung Apex ' Superior lobe View (@) Oblique fissure View (e) POSTERIOR Horizontal Hilum and its contents (root) fissure Inferior lobe Middle lob . rears fone Oblique fissure Cardiac notch ANTERIOR Base ANTERIOR (d) Medial view of right lung (e) Medial view of left lung QUESTION Why are the right and left lungs slightly different in size and shape? 1104 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. The lungs almost fill the thorax (figure 23.9a). The apex of the lungs lies superior to the medial third of the clavicles, and this is the only area that can be palpated. The anterior, lateral, and posterior surfaces of the lungs lie against the ribs. The base of the lungs extends from the sixth costal cartilage anteriorly to the spi-nous process of the tenth thoracic vertebra posteriorly. The pleura extends about 5 cm (2 in.) below the base from the sixth costal cartilage anteriorly to the twelfth rib posteriorly. Thus, the lungs do not completely fill the pleural cavity in this area. Removal of excessive fluid in the pleural cavity can be accomplished without injuring lung tissue by inserting a needle anteriorly through the seventh intercostal space, a procedure called thoracentesis (thor!-a-sen-TE-sis; -centesis = puncture). The needle is passed along the superior border of the lower rib to avoid damage to the intercostal nerves and blood vessels. Inferior to the seventh intercostal space there is danger of penetrating the diaphragm. CLINICAL CONNECTION Pneumothorax and haemothorax a lung, or rarely an entire lung, is called atelectasis (at'- In certain conditions, the pleural cavities may fill with @-LEK-ta-sis; ateles- = incomplete; -ectasis = expansion). air (pneumothorax; noo'/-m6-THOR-aks; pneumo- = air goal of treatment is the evacuation of air (or blood) breath), blood (haemothorax), or pus. Air in the pleural from the pleural space, which allows the lung to reinflate. A cavities, most commonly introduced in a surgical opening small pneumothorax may resolve on its own, but it is often of the chest or as a result of a stab or gunshot wound, Necessary to insert a chest tube to assist in evacuation. may cause the lungs to collapse. This collapse of a partof Lobes, fissures, and lobules One or two fissures divide each lung into lobes (figure 23.9b-e). Both lungs have an oblique fissure, which extends inferiorly and anteriorly; the right lung also has a horizontal fissure. The oblique fissure in the left lung separates the superior lobe from the inferior lobe. In the right lung, the superior part of the oblique fissure separates the superior lobe from the inferior lobe; the inferior part of the oblique fissure separates the inferior lobe from the middle lobe, which is bordered superiorly by the horizontal fissure. Each lobe receives its own lobar bronchus. Thus, the right main bronchus gives rise to thr