rimary DIVERTICULUM Trachea bronchus TRACHEAL BRONCHIAL -=> BUD BUDS. Oesophagus --> ' Right Oesophagus--_> secondary bronchi Fourth week Fifth week Right Left superior superior lobe lobe Right middle lobe Right Pan ! 5 tertiary tertiary Right inferior inferior Developing bronchi bronchi lobe lobe pleura Sixth week Eighth week QUESTION When does the respiratory system begin to develop in an embryo? From 26 weeks to birth, many more primitive alveoli develop; they consist of type I alveolar cells (main sites of gaseous exchange) and type II surfactant-producing cells. Blood capillaries also establish close contact with the primitive alveoli. Recall that surfactant is necessary to lower surface tension of alveolar fluid and thus reduce the tendency of alveoli to collapse on exhalation. Although surfactant production begins by 20 weeks, it is present in only small quantities. Amounts sufficient to permit survival of a premature (preterm) infant are not produced until 26 to 28 weeks' gestation. Infants born before 26 to 28 weeks are at high risk of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), in which the alveoli collapse during exhalation and must be reinflated during inhalation (see 'Clinical connection: Respiratory distress syndrome' in section 23.2). At about 30 weeks, mature alveoli develop. However, it is estimated that only about one-sixth of the full complement of alveoli develop before birth; the remainder develop after birth during the first 8 years. As the lungs develop, they acquire their pleural sacs. The visceral pleura and the parietal pleura develop from mesoderm. The space between the pleural layers is the pleural cavity. During development, breathing movements of the foetus cause the aspiration of fluid into the lungs. This fluid is a mixture of amniotic fluid, mucous from bronchial glands, and surfactant. At birth, the lungs are about half-filled with fluid. When breathing begins at birth, most of the fluid is rapidly reabsorbed by blood and lymph capillaries and a small amount is expelled through the nose and mouth during delivery. CHECKPOINT 31. What structures develop from the laryngotracheal bud? 23.9 Ageing and the respiratory system LEARNING OBJECTIVE 23.9 Describe the effects of ageing on the respiratory system. With advancing age, the airways and tissues of the respiratory tract, including the alveoli, become less elastic and more rigid; the chest wall becomes more rigid as well. The result is a decrease in lung capacity. In fact, vital capacity (the maximum amount of air that can be exhaled after maximal inhalation) can © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. 