rease in breathing is followed by a more gradual decline to the resting level. The initial decrease is due mainly to changes in neural factors when movement stops or slows; the more gradual phase reflects the slower return of blood chemistry levels and temperature to the resting state. CLINICAL CONNECTION Effects of smoking on the respiratory the movement of cilia and destroy cilia in the lining of system the respiratory system. Thus, excess mucous and foreign debris are not easily removed, which further adds to the dif- ficulty in breathing. The irritants can also convert the normal respiratory epithelium into stratified squamous epithelium, which lacks cilia and goblet cells. (6) With time, smoking leads to destruction of elastic fibres in the lungs and is the prime cause of emphysema (described in 'Disorders: Homeostatic imbalances' at the end of the chapter). These changes cause collapse of small bronchioles and trapping of air in alveoli at the end of exhalation. The result is less efficient gas exchange. Smoking may cause a person to become easily 'winded' during even moderate exercise because several factors decrease respiratory efficiency in smokers. (1) Nicotine constricts terminal bronchioles, which decreases airflow into and out of the lungs. (2) Carbon monoxide in smoke binds to haemoglobin and reduces its oxygen-carrying capability. (3) Irritants in smoke cause increased mucous secretion by the mucosa of the bronchial tree and swelling of the mucosal lining, both of which impede airflow into and out of the lungs. (4) Irritants in smoke also inhibit CHECKPOINT 30. How does exercise affect the DRG? 23.8 Development of the respiratory system LEARNING OBJECTIVE 23.8 Describe the development of the respiratory system. The development of the mouth and pharynx is discussed in chapter 24. Here we consider the development of the other structures of the respiratory system that you learned about in this chapter. At about 4 weeks of development, the respiratory system begins as an outgrowth of the foregut (precursor of some digestive organs) just inferior to the pharynx. This outgrowth is called the respiratory diverticulum (di-ver-TIK-a-lum) bud (figure 23.27). The endoderm lining the respiratory diverticulum gives rise to the epithelium and glands of the trachea, bronchi, and alveoli. Mesoderm surrounding the respiratory diverticulum gives rise to the connective tissue, cartilage, and smooth muscle of these structures. The epithelial lining of the /arynx develops from the endoderm of the respiratory diverticulum; the cartilages and muscles originate from the fourth and sixth pharyngeal arches, swellings on the surface of the embryo (see figure 29.13). As the respiratory diverticulum elongates, its distal end enlarges to form a globular tracheal bud, which gives rise to the trachea. Soon after, the tracheal bud divides into bronchial buds, which branch repeatedly and develop with the bronchi. By 24 weeks, 17 orders of branches have formed and respiratory bronchioles have developed. During weeks 6 to 16, all major elements of the Jungs have formed, except for those involved in gaseous exchange (respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveoli). Since breathing is not possible at this stage, foetuses born during this time cannot survive. During weeks 16 to 26, lung tissue becomes highly vascular and respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and some primitive alveoli develop. Although it is possible for a foetus born near the end of this period to survive if given intensive care, death frequently occurs due to the immaturity of the respiratory and other systems. 1136 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Development of the bronchial tubes and lungs. The respiratory system develops from endoderm and mesoderm. Left primary bronchus Left secondary Pharynx " i ' Pharynx bronchi RESPIRATORY Right p