sthma-like symptoms) or damage to the small airway structure that contributes to lung health and combating infection. Fortunately, the Australian Institute , with expert guidance, has provided both general and exercise-specific advice for athletes, coaches and the wider public. This mended activities that modify ventilation requirements, and physical training environments that can aid with filtering and cleaning air (for example, indoor training where possible).> Knowing the importance of maintaining a healthy and func- tioning respiratory system should encourage athletes to minimise the risks of poor air quality impacting on such a critical body system for exercise. With likely increased frequency of poor air quality in the future, not only from bushfires, these guidelines are an invaluable resource for anyone taking part in exercise when air quality deteriorates. guidance factors in measurable air quality, types of recom- CHECKPOINT 4. List the roles of each of the three anatomical regions of the pharynx in respiration. 5. Describe the location, structure, and function of the trachea. 6. How does the larynx function in respiration and voice production? 7. Describe the structure of the bronchial tree. Lungs The lungs (= lightweights, because they float) are paired cone-shaped organs in the thoracic cavity (figure 23.8). They are separated from each other by the heart and other structures of the mediastinum, which divides the thoracic cavity into two anatomically distinct chambers. As a result, if trauma causes one lung to collapse, the other may remain expanded. Each lung is enclosed and protected by a double-layered serous membrane called the pleural membrane (PLOOR-al; pleur- = side). The superficial layer, called the parietal pleura, lines the wall of the thoracic cavity; the deep layer, the visceral pleura, covers the lungs themselves (figure 23.8). Between the visceral and parietal pleurae is a small space, the pleural cavity, which contains a small amount of lubricating fluid secreted by the membranes. This pleural fluid reduces friction between the membranes, allowing them to slide easily over one another during breathing. Pleural fluid also causes the two membranes to adhere to one another just as a film of water causes two glass microscope slides to stick together, a phenomenon called surface tension. Separate pleural cavities surround the left and right lungs. Inflammation of the pleural membrane, called pleurisy or pleuritis, may in its early stages be associated with pain due to friction between the parietal and visceral layers of the pleura. If the inflammation persists, excess fluid accumulates in the pleural space, a condition known as pleural effusion. Relationship of the pleural membranes to the lungs. The parietal pleura lines the thoracic cavity, and the visceral pleura covers the lungs. Transverse Plane VISCERAL PLEURA Left lung Superior Ascending aorta vena cava . Pulmonary arteries PARIETAL. PLEURA Pulmonary vein View . Right lung Oesophagus PLEURAL - Thoracic aorta CAVITY Body of T4 Spinal cord LATERAL MP. fae th MEDIAL POSTERIOR Inferior view of transverse section through thoracic cavity showing pleural cavity and pleural membranes QUESTION What type of membrane is the pleural membrane? © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. The lungs extend from the diaphragm to just slightly superior to the clavicles and lie against the ribs anteriorly and posteriorly (figure 23.9a). The broad inferior portion of the lung, the base, is concave and fits over the convex area of the diaphragm. The narrow superior portion of the lung is the apex. The surface of the lung lying against the ribs, the costal surface, matches the rounded curvature of the ribs. The mediastinal (medial) surface of each lung contains a region, the hilum, through which bronchi, pulmonary blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves enter and exit (figur