en this happens, the Po, declines and Pc, rises in systemic arterial blood. The left ventricle pumps oxygenated blood into the aorta and through the systemic arteries to systemic capillaries. The exchange of O, and CO, between systemic capillaries and tissue cells is called internal respiration or systemic gas exchange (figure 23.16b). As O, leaves the bloodstream, oxygenated blood is converted into deoxygenated blood. Unlike external respiration, which occurs only in the lungs, internal respiration occurs in tissues throughout the body. The Po, of blood pumped into systemic capillaries is higher (100 mmHg) than the Po, in tissue cells (40 mmHg at rest) because the cells constantly use O, to produce ATP. Due to this pressure difference, oxygen diffuses out of the capillaries into tissue cells and blood Po, drops to 40 mmHg by the time the blood exits systemic capillaries. While O, diffuses from the systemic capillaries into tissue cells, CO, diffuses in the opposite direction. Because tissue cells are constantly producing CO), the Peo, of cells (45 mmHg at rest) is higher than that of systemic capillary blood (40 mmHg). As a result, CO, diffuses from tissue cells through interstitial fluid into systemic capillaries until the Pco, in the blood increases to 45 mmHg. The deoxygenated blood then returns to the heart and is pumped to the lungs for another cycle of external respiration. In a person at rest, tissue cells, on average, need only 25% of the available O, in oxygenated blood; despite its name, deoxygenated blood retains 75% of its O, content. During exercise, more O, diffuses from the blood into metabolically active cells, such as contracting skeletal muscle fibres. Active cells use more O, for ATP production, causing the O, content of deoxygenated blood to drop below 75%. The rate of pulmonary and systemic gas exchange depends on several factors. * Partial pressure difference of the gases. Alveolar Po, must be higher than blood Po, for oxygen to diffuse from alveolar air into the blood. The rate of diffusion is faster when the difference between Po, in alveolar air and pulmonary capillary blood is larger; diffusion is slower when the difference is smaller. The differences between Po, and Pcg, in alveolar air versus pulmonary blood increase during exercise. The larger partial pressure differences accelerate the rates of gas diffusion. The partial pressures of O, and CO, in alveolar air also depend on the rate of airflow into and out of the lungs. Certain drugs (such as morphine) slow ventilation, thereby decreasing the amount of O, and CO, that can be exchanged between alveolar air and blood. With increasing altitude, the total atmospheric pressure decreases, as does the partial pressure of O, - from 159 mmHg at sea level, to 110 mmHg at 10 000 ft, to 73 mmHg at 20,000 ft. Although O, still is 20.9% of the total, the Po, of inhaled air decreases with increasing altitude. Alveolar Po, decreases correspondingly, and O, diffuses into the blood more slowly. The common signs and symptoms of high altitude sickness - shortness of breath, headache, fatigue, insomnia, nausea, and dizziness - are due to a lower level of oxygen in the blood. ¢ Surface area available for gas exchange. As you learned earlier in the chapter, the surface area of the alveoli is huge (about 70 m2 or 750 ft"). In addition, many capillaries surround each alveolus, so many that as much as 900 mL of blood is able to participate in gas exchange at any instant. Any pulmonary disorder that decreases the functional surface area of the respiratory membranes decreases the rate of external respiration. In emphysema (see 'Disorders: Homeostatic imbalances' at the end of the chapter), for example, alveolar walls disintegrate, so surface area is smaller than normal and pulmonary gas exchange is slowed. ¢ Diffusion distance. The respiratory membrane is very thin, so diffusion occurs quickly. Also, the capillaries are so narrow that the red blood cells must pass through 