ut 3100 mL in an average adult male and 1900 mL in an average adult female (figure 23.15). Even more air can be inhaled if inhalation follows forced exhalation. If you inhale normally and then exhale as forcibly as possible, you should be able to push out considerably more air in addition to the 500 mL of tidal volume. The extra 1200 mL in males and 700 mL in females is called the expiratory reserve volume. The forced expiratory volume in I second (FEV, g) is the volume of air that can be exhaled from the lungs in | second with maximal effort following a maximal inhalation. Typically, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) greatly reduces FEV , because COPD increases airway resistance. Even after the expiratory reserve volume is exhaled, considerable air remains in the lungs because the subatmospheric intrapleural pressure keeps the alveoli slightly inflated, and some air remains in the noncollapsible airways. This volume, which cannot be measured by spirometry, is called the residual volume (re-ZID-u-al) and amounts to about 1200 mL in males and 1100 mL in females. If the thoracic cavity is opened, the intrapleural pressure rises to equal the atmospheric pressure and forces out some of the residual volume. The air remaining is called the minimal volume. Minimal volume provides a medical and legal tool for determining whether a baby is born dead (stillborn) or died after birth. The presence of minimal volume can be demonstrated by placing a piece of lung in water and observing if it floats. Foetal lungs contain no air, so the lung of a stillborn baby will not float in water. Lung capacities are combinations of specific lung volumes (figure 23.15). Inspiratory capacity is the sum of tidal volume and inspiratory reserve volume (500 mL + 3100 mL = 3600 mL in males and 500 mL + 1900 mL = 2400 mL in females). Functional residual capacity is the sum of residual volume and expiratory reserve volume (1200 mL + 1200 mL = 2400 mL in males and 1100 mL + 700 mL = 1800 mL in females). Vital capacity is the sum of inspiratory reserve volume, tidal volume, and expiratory reserve volume (4800 mL in males and 3100 mL in females). Finally, total lung capacity is the sum of vital capacity and residual volume (4800 mL + 1200 mL = 6000 mL in males and 3100 mL + 1100 mL = 4200 mL in females). SPORT SPOTLIGHT The 'athlete' soldier and respiratory function Carrying a load, like a heavy backpack, is common in many recreational activities such as hiking and long-distance trekking. There are also many occupations that require staff to carry heavy loads on the torso including firefighters, park rangers and Defence Force personnel. Soldiers will carry on average 20 kilograms of equipment and body protection, and sometimes more than 50 kilograms as required to survive for extended durations. These loads are most often carried around the torso as a backpack and body armour arrangement. Walking or marching with the excessive mass requires a dramatic increase in energy. Therefore to meet the demands, the respiratory system must be able to increase the ventilation of the alveoli to achieve successful oxygen uptake. Therein lies the physiological conundrum! The increased respiratory ventilation requires that the rib Researchers at the University have been cage be further expanded to increase the tidal volume of | conducting a series of studies to quantify the impact of each breath. Yet, the load itself is surrounding the torso and _-_ carrying a heavy backpack on respiratory function and this makes it difficult to expand the rib cage. exercise performance. In a recently published investiga- tion, young healthy participants were required to carry © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. 22 kilograms on the torso while their maximal aerobic power and exercise tolerance was measured.® The team compared the effects to firstly, not carrying any load to secondly, when t