40 mmHg. Then, a large percentage of the O, is released from haemoglobin, providing more O, to metabolically active tissues. Other factors affecting the affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen Although Po, is the most important factor that determines the per cent Oy saturation of haemoglobin, several other factors influence the tightness or affinity with which haemoglobin binds O). In effect, these factors shift the entire curve either to the left (higher affinity) or to the right (lower affinity). The changing affinity of haemoglobin for O, is another example of how homeostatic mechanisms adjust body activities to cellular needs. Each one makes sense if you keep in mind that metabolically active tissue cells need O, and produce acids, CO,, and heat as wastes. The following four factors affect the affinity of haemoglobin for Op. 1. Acidity (pH). As acidity increases (pH decreases), the affinity of haemoglobin for O, decreases, and O, dissociates more readily from haemoglobin (figure 23.19a). In other words, increasing acidity enhances the unloading of oxygen from haemoglobin. The main acids produced by metabolically active tissues are lactic acid and carbonic acid. When pH decreases, the entire oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve shifts to the right; at any given Po, , Hb is less saturated with 05, a change termed the Bohr effect (BOR). The Bohr effect works both ways: an increase in H* in blood causes O, to unload from haemoglobin, and the binding of O, to haemoglobin causes unloading of H* from haemoglobin. The explanation for the Bohr effect is that haemoglobin can act as a buffer for hydrogen ions (H*). But when H* ions bind to amino acids in haemoglobin, they alter its structure slightly, decreasing its oxygen-carrying capacity. Thus, lowered pH drives O, off haemoglobin, making more O, available for tissue cells. By contrast, elevated pH increases the affinity of haemoglobin for O, and shifts the oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve to the left. 1124 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. 2. Partial pressure of carbon dioxide. CO, also can bind to haemoglobin, and the effect is similar to that of H* (shifting the curve to the right). As Peo, rises, haemoglobin releases O7 more readily (figure 23.19b). Peg, and pH are related factors because low blood pH (acidity) results from high Pco,. As CO) enters the blood, much of it is temporarily converted to carbonic acid (H,CO3), a reaction catalysed by an enzyme in red blood cells called carbonic anhydrase (CA). co, +H,O-2H,Co, = Ht + HCO; Carbon - Water Carbonic Hydrogen Bicarbonate dioxide acid ion ion The carbonic acid thus formed in red blood cells dissociates into hydrogen ions and bicarbonate ions. As the H* concentration increases, pH decreases. Thus, an increased Po, produces a more acidic environment, which helps release O, from haemoglobin. During exercise, lactic acid - a by-product of anaerobic metabolism within muscles - also decreases blood pH. Decreased Pco, (and elevated pH) shifts the saturation curve to the left. 3. Temperature. Within limits, as temperature increases, so does the amount of O, released from haemoglobin (figure 23.20). Heat is a by-product of the metabolic reactions of all cells, and the heat released by contracting muscle fibres tends to raise body temperature. Metabolically active cells require more O, and liberate more acids and heat. The acids and heat in turn promote release of O, from oxyhaemoglobin. Fever produces a similar result. In contrast, during hypothermia (lowered body temperature) cellular metabolism slows, the need for O, is reduced, and more O, remains bound to haemoglobin (a shift to the left in the saturation curve). 4. BPG. A substance found in red blood cells called 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPG) (bis'-fos-f6-GLIS- e-rat), previously called diphosphoglycerate (DPG), decreases the affinity of haem