H). As blood passes through the pulmonary capillaries, molecules of CO, dissolved in blood plasma and CO, that dissociates from the globin portion of haemoglobin diffuse into alveolar air and are exhaled. At the same time, inhaled O, is diffusing from alveolar air into RBCs and is binding to haemoglobin to form oxyhaemoglobin (Hb-O,). Carbon dioxide also is released from HCO;" when H* combines with HCO; inside RBCs. The HCO formed from this reaction then splits into CO, which is exhaled, and H,O. As the concentration of HCO; declines inside RBCs in pulmonary capillaries, HCO," diffuses in from the blood plasma, in exchange for Cl". In sum, oxygenated blood leaving the lungs has increased O, content and decreased amounts of CO, and H*. In systemic capillaries, as cells use O, and produce CO), the chemical reactions reverse (figure 23.22b). Summary of ch al reactions that occur during ga hange. (a) As carbon dioxide (COz) is exhaled, haemoglobin (Hb) inside red blood cells in pulmonary capillaries unloads CO, and picks from alveolar air. Binding -H releases hydrogen ions (H*). Bicarbonate ions (HCO3~) pass into the RBC and bind to released H*, forming carbonic acid (H,CO3). The H,CO, dissociates into water (HO) and CO,, and the CO. diffuses from blood into alveolar air. To maintain electrical balance, a chloride ion (CI) exits the RBC for each HCO,~ that enters (reverse chloride shift). (b) CO, diffuses out of tissue cells that produce it and enters red blood cells, where some of it binds to haemoglobin, forming carbaminohaemoglobin (Hb-CO,). This reaction causes O, to dissociate from oxyhaemoglobin (Hb-O,). Other molecules of CO, combine with water to produce bicarbonate ions (HCO3~) and hydrogen ions (H*). As Hb buffers Ht, the Hb releases O, (Bohr effect). To maintain electrical balance, a chloride ion (CI-) enters the RBC for each HCO3~ that exits (chloride shift). Reverse chloride Exhaled cl seeeeCO, teeeree-CO, + HCO; see On ceeeepeebem Oneceee Interstitial Plasma Inhaled fluid Alveolus Pulmonary Red blood cell capillary wall (a) Exchange of O, and CO, in pulmonary capillaries (external respiration) Chloride cr COnte8829 COnteees pes CO, eFF5 HCO, On seeeeeO, oo ey) dee Interstitial fluid Tissue cell Systemic Red blood cell capillary wall (b) Exchange of O» and COz in systemic capillaries (internal respiration) QUESTION Would you expect the concentration of HCO; to be higher in blood plasma taken from a systemic artery or a systemic vein? 1128 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. CHECKPOINT 24. In aresting person, how many O, molecules are attached to each haemoglobin molecule, on average, in blood in the pulmonary arteries? In blood in the pulmonary veins? 25. What is the relationship between haemoglobin and Py, ? How do temperature, H*, Pog,, and BPG influence the affinity for 05? - - 26. Why can haemoglobin unload more oxygen as blood flows through capillaries of metabolically active tissues, such as skeletal muscle during exercise, than is unloaded at rest? 23.6 Control of breathing LEARNING OBJECTIVE 23.6 Explain how the nervous system controls breathing. At rest, about 200 mL of O, is used each minute by body cells. During strenuous exercise, however, O, use typically increases 15- to 20-fold in normal healthy adults, and as much as 30-fold in elite endurance- trained athletes. Several mechanisms help match breathing effort to metabolic demand. Respiratory centre The size of the thorax is altered by the action of the breathing muscles, which contract as a result of nerve impulses transmitted from centres in the brain and relax in the absence of nerve impulses. These nerve impulses are sent from clusters of neurons located bilaterally in the brain stem. This widely dispersed group of neurons, collectively called the respiratory centre, can be divided into two principal areas on the basi