e ALVEOLAR ' ALVEOLAR PRESSURE = 760 mmHg INTRAPLEURAL INTRAPLEURAL " _ _ gradient and the lung volume PRESSURE = PRESSURE = expands. During deep 756 mmHg 754 mmHg inhalation, the scalene and - sternocleidomastoid muscles expand the chest further, thereby creating a greater drop in alveolar pressure. . At rest, when the diaphragm is relaxed, alveolar pressure is equal to atomospheric pressure, and there is no air flow. ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE = 760 mmHg 3. During exhalation, the diaphragm relaxes and the external ALVEOLAR intercostals relas. The chest and lungs recoil, the chest cavity PRESSURE = contracts, and the alveolar pressure increases above 762 mmHg atmospheric pressure. Air flows out of the lungs in response to the pressure gradient, and the lung volume decreases. During INTRAPLEURAL forced exhalations, the internal intercostals and abdominal PRESSURE = muscles contract, thereby reducing the size of the chest cavity 756 mmHg further and creating a greater increase in alveolar pressure. QUESTION How does the intrapleural pressure change during a normal, quiet breath? As the volume of the lungs increases in this way, the pressure inside the lungs, called the alveolar (intrapulmonic) pressure, drops from 760 to 758 mmHg. A pressure difference is thus established between the atmosphere and the alveoli. Because air always flows from a region of higher pressure to a region of lower pressure, inhalation takes place. Air continues to flow into the lungs as long as a pressure difference exists. During deep, forceful inhalations, accessory muscles of inspiration also participate in increasing the size of the thoracic cavity (see figure 23.13a). The muscles are so named because they make little, if any, contribution during normal quiet inhalation, but during exercise or forced ventilation they may contract vigorously. The accessory muscles of inhalation include the sternocleidomastoid muscles, which elevate the sternum; the scalene muscles, which elevate the first two ribs; and the pectoralis minor muscles, which elevate the third through fifth ribs. Because both normal quiet inhalation and inhalation during exercise or forced ventilation involve muscular contraction, the process of inhalation is said to be active. 1112 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Exhalation Breathing out, called exhalation (expiration), is also due to a pressure gradient, but in this case the gradient is in the opposite direction: The pressure in the lungs is greater than the pressure of the atmosphere. Normal exhalation during quiet breathing, unlike inhalation, is a passive process because no muscular contractions are involved. Instead, exhalation results from elastic recoil of the chest wall and lungs, both of which have a natural tendency to spring back after they have been stretched. Two inwardly directed forces contribute to elastic recoil: (1) the recoil of elastic fibres that were stretched during inhalation and (2) the inward pull of surface tension due to the film of alveolar fluid. Exhalation starts when the inspiratory muscles relax. As the diaphragm relaxes, its dome moves superiorly owing to its elasticity. As the external intercostals relax, the ribs are depressed. These movements decrease the vertical, lateral, and anteroposterior diameters of the thoracic cavity, which decreases lung volume. In turn, the alveolar pressure increases to about 762 mmHg. Air then flows from the area of higher pressure in the alveoli to the area of lower pressure in the atmosphere (see figure 23.14). Exhalation becomes active only during forceful breathing, as occurs while playing a wind instrument or during exercise. During these times, muscles of exhalation - the abdominal and internal intercostals (see figure 23.13a) - contract, which increases pressure in the abdominal region and thorax. Contraction of the abdominal muscles 