rflow by obstructing the trachea. The rings of cartilage that support the trachea may be accidentally crushed, the mucous membrane may become inflamed and swell so much that it closes off the passageway, excess mucous secreted by inflamed membranes may clog the lower respiratory passages, a large object may be aspirated (breathed in), or a cancerous tumour may protrude into the airway. Two methods are used to reestablish airflow past a tracheal obstruction. If the obstruction is above the level of the larynx, a tracheotomy (tra-ké-O-t6-mé) may be performed. In this procedure, also called a tracheostomy, a skin incision is followed by a short longitudinal incision into the trachea below the cricoid cartilage. A tracheal tube is then inserted to create an emergency air passageway. The second method is intu- bation (in'-too-BA-shun), in which a tube is inserted into the mouth or nose and passed inferiorly through the larynx and trachea. The firm wall of the tube pushes aside any flexible obstruction, and the lumen of the tube provides a passageway for air; any mucous clogging the trachea can be suctioned out through the tube. Bronchi At the superior border of the fifth thoracic vertebra, the trachea divides into a right main (primary) bronchus (BRONG-kus = windpipe), which goes into the right lung, and a /eft main (primary) bronchus, which goes into the left lung (figure 23.7). The right main bronchus is more vertical, shorter, and wider than the left. As a result, an aspirated object is more likely to enter and lodge in the right main bronchus than the left. Like the trachea, the main bronchi (BRONG-ki) contain incomplete rings of cartilage and are lined by pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium. Branching of ays from the trachea: the bronc! tree. The bronchial tree consists of macroscopic airways that begin at the trachea and continue through the terminal bronchioles. BRANCHING OF BRONCHIAL TREE Trachea ' Larynx & Main bronchi TRACHEA Lobar bronchi Right lung Left lung Segmental bronchi Visceral pleura / Bronchioles Parietal pleura Pleural cavity Terminal bronchioles BRONCHUS Location of carina RIGHT LOBAR LEFT MAIN BRONCHUS BRONCHUS LEFT LOBAR BRONCHUS RIGHT LEFT SEGMENTAL SEGMENTAL BRONCHUS BRONCHUS RIGHT LEFT BRONCHIOLE BRONCHIOLE LEFT TERMINAL RIGHT Cardiac notch BRONCHIOLE TERMINAL Diaphragm BRONCHIOLE Anterior view QUESTION How many lobes and secondary bronchi are present in each lung? At the point where the trachea divides into right and left main bronchi an internal ridge called the carina (ka-RI-na = keel of a boat) is formed by a posterior and somewhat inferior projection of the last tracheal cartilage. The mucous membrane of the carina is one of the most sensitive areas of the entire larynx and © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. trachea for triggering a cough reflex. Widening and distortion of the carina is a serious sign because it usually indicates a carcinoma of the lymph nodes around the region where the trachea divides. On entering the lungs, the main bronchi divide to form smaller bronchi - the lobar (secondary) bronchi, one for each lobe of the lung. (The right lung has three lobes; the left lung has two.) The lobar bronchi continue to branch, forming still smaller bronchi, called segmental (tertiary) bronchi (TER-shé-e-ré), that supply the specific bronchopulmonary segments within the lobes. The segmental bronchi then divide into bronchioles. Bronchioles in turn branch repeatedly, and the smallest ones branch into even smaller tubes called terminal bronchioles. These bronchioles contain club (Clara) cells, columnar, nonciliated cells interspersed among the epithelial cells. Club cells may protect against harmful effects of inhaled toxins and carcinogens, produce surfactant (discussed shortly), and function as stem cells (reserve cells), which give rise to various cells of the epithelium. The terminal bron