y a respiratory infection or irritants such as cigarette smoke. Inflammation of the vocal folds causes hoarseness or loss of voice by interfering with the contrac- tion of the folds or by causing them to swell to the point acquire a permanent hoarseness from the damage done by chronic inflammation. Cancer of the larynx is found almost exclusively in individuals who smoke. The condition is characterised by hoarseness, pain on swallowing, or pain radiating to an ear. Treatment consists of radiation therapy and/or surgery. where they cannot vibrate freely. Many long-termsmokers The structures of voice production The mucous membrane of the larynx forms two pairs of folds (figure 23.4c): a superior pair called the vestibular folds (false vocal cords) and an inferior pair called the vocal folds (true vocal cords). The space 1098 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. between the vestibular folds is known as the rima vestibuli. The laryngeal ventricle is a lateral expansion of the middle portion of the laryngeal cavity inferior to the vestibular folds and superior to the vocal folds (see figure 23.2b). While the vestibular folds do not function in voice production, they do have other important functional roles. When the vestibular folds are brought together, they function in holding the breath against pressure in the thoracic cavity, such as might occur when a person strains to lift a heavy object. The vocal folds are the principal structures of voice production. Deep to the mucous membrane of the vocal folds, which is nonkeratinised stratified squamous epithelium, are bands of elastic ligaments stretched between the rigid cartilages of the larynx like the strings on a guitar. Intrinsic laryngeal muscles attach to both the rigid cartilages and the vocal folds. When the muscles contract they move the cartilages, which pulls the elastic ligaments tight, and this stretches the vocal folds out into the airways so that the rima glottidis is narrowed. Contracting and relaxing the muscles varies the tension in the vocal folds, much like loosening or tightening a guitar string. Air passing through the larynx vibrates the folds and produces sound (phonation) by setting up sound waves in the column of air in the pharynx, nose, and mouth. The variation in the pitch of the sound is related to the tension in the vocal folds. The greater the pressure of air, the louder the sound produced by the vibrating vocal folds. When the intrinsic muscles of the larynx contract, they pull on the arytenoid cartilages, which causes the cartilages to pivot and slide. Contraction of the posterior cricoarytenoid muscles, for example, moves the vocal folds apart (abduction), thereby opening the rima glottidis (figure 23.5a). By contrast, contraction of the lateral cricoarytenoid muscles moves the vocal folds together (adduction), thereby closing the rima glottidis (figure 23.5b). Other intrinsic muscles can elongate (and place tension on) or shorten (and relax) the vocal folds. Movement of the vocal folds. The glottis consists of a pair of folds of mucous membrane in the larynx (the vocal folds) and the space between them (the rima glottidis). <-_--- Thyroid cartilage \ : Epiglottis Glottis: Vocal folds Cricoid cartilage Vocal ligament Rima glottidis Vestibular folds Cuneiform cartilage Corniculate cartilage cricoarytenoid muscle Superior view of cartilages and muscles View through a laryngoscope (a) Movement of vocal folds apart (abduction) Lateral cricoarytenoid muscle (b) Movement of vocal folds together (adduction) QUESTION What is the main function of the vocal folds? Pitch is controlled by the tension on the vocal folds. If they are pulled taut by the muscles, they vibrate more rapidly, and a higher pitch results. Decreasing the muscular tension on the vocal folds causes them to vibrate more slowly and produce lower pitched sound