s, at a will combine with half the available haemoglobin molecules and reduce the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood by 50%. Elevated blood levels of CO cause carbon monoxide poisoning, which can cause the lips and oral mucosa to appear bright, cherry-red (the colour of haemoglobin with carbon monoxide bound to it). Without prompt treatment, carbon monoxide poisoning is fatal. It is possible to rescue a victim of CO poisoning by administering pure oxygen, which speeds up the separation of carbon monoxide from concentration as small as 0.1% (Pgq = 0.5 mmHg), CO haemoglobin. Carbon dioxide transport Under normal resting conditions, each 100 mL of deoxygenated blood contains the equivalent of 53 mL of gaseous CO}, which is transported in the blood in three main forms (see figure 23.17). 1. Dissolved CO}. The smallest percentage - about 7% - is dissolved in blood plasma. On reaching the lungs, it diffuses into alveolar air and is exhaled. 2. Carbamino compounds. A somewhat higher percentage, about 23%, combines with the amino groups of amino acids and proteins in blood to form carbamino compounds (kar-BAM-i-n6). Because the most prevalent protein in blood is haemoglobin (inside red blood cells), most of the CO, transported in this manner is bound to haemoglobin. The main CO) binding sites are the terminal amino acids in the two alpha and two beta globin chains. Haemoglobin that has bound CO, is termed carbaminohaemoglobin (Hb-CO)). Hb + Haemoglobin The formation of carbaminohaemoglobin is greatly influenced ,. For example, in tissue capillaries Peg, is relatively high, which promotes formation of carbaminohaemoglobin. But in pulmonary capillaries, Peo, is relatively low, and the CO, readily splits apart from globin and enters the alveoli by diffusion. 3. Bicarbonate ions. The greatest percentage of CO, - about 70% - is transported in blood plasma as bicarbonate ions (HCO;_) (bi/-KAR-bo-nat). As CO, diffuses into systemic capillaries and enters red blood cells, it reacts with water in the presence of the enzyme carbonic anhydrase (CA) to form carbonic acid, which dissociates into H* and HCO;~. cA Co, Carbon dioxide Hb-CO, Carbaminohaemoglobin =- = CO, +H,O == H,CO, == H* + HCO, Carbon - Water Carbonic Hydrogen -_ Bicarbonate dioxide acid ion ion Thus, as blood picks up CO,, HCO;" accumulates inside RBCs. Some HCO; moves out into the blood plasma, down its concentration gradient. In exchange, chloride ions (CI-) move from plasma into the RBCs. This exchange of negative ions, which maintains the electrical balance between blood plasma and RBC cytosol, is known as the chloride shift (see figure 23.22b). The net effect of these reactions is that CO) is removed from tissue cells and transported in blood plasma as HCO, . As blood passes through pulmonary capillaries in the lungs, all of these reactions reverse and CO, is exhaled. The amount of CO, that can be transported in the blood is influenced by the per cent saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen. The lower the amount of oxyhaemoglobin (Hb-O,), the higher the CO,- carrying capacity of the blood, a relationship known as the Haldane effect. Two characteristics of deoxyhaemoglobin give rise to the Haldane effect: (1) Deoxyhaemoglobin binds to and thus transports more CO, than does Hb-O). (2) Deoxyhaemoglobin also buffers more H* than does Hb-O3, thereby removing H* from solution and promoting conversion of CO, to HCO3" via the reaction catalysed by carbonic anhydrase. Summary of gas exchange and transport in lungs and tissues Deoxygenated blood returning to the pulmonary capillaries in the lungs (figure 23.22a) contains CO dissolved in blood plasma, CO, combined with globin as carbaminohaemoglobin (Hb--CO,), and CO, incorporated into HCO;" within RBCs. The RBCs have also picked up H*, some of which binds to © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. and therefore is buffered by haemoglobin (Hb-