lood drains into bronchial veins, branches of the azygos system, and returns to the heart via the superior vena cava. Patency of the respiratory system Throughout the discussion of the respiratory organs, several examples were given of structures or secretions that help to maintain patency of the system so that air passageways are kept free of obstruction. These included the bony and cartilaginous frameworks of the nose, skeletal muscles of the pharynx, cartilages of the larynx, C-shaped rings of cartilage in the trachea and bronchi, smooth muscle in the bronchioles, and surfactant in the alveoli. Unfortunately, there are also factors that can compromise patency. These include crushing injuries to bone and cartilage, a deviated nasal septum, nasal polyps, inflammation of mucous membranes, spasms of smooth muscle, and a deficiency of surfactant. A summary of the epithelial linings and special features of the organs of the respiratory system is presented in table 23.1. TABLE 23.1 Summary of the structures of the respiratory system Structure Epithelium Ci Goblet cells Special features NOSE Vestibule Nonkeratinised stratified No. No. Contains numerous hairs. squamous. Respiratory Pseudostratified ciliated Yes. Yes. Contains conchae and region columnar. meatuses. Olfactory region Olfactory epithelium Yes. No. Functions in olfaction. (olfactory receptors). PHARYNX Nasopharynx Pseudostratified ciliated Yes. Yes. Passageway for air; columnar. contains internal nares, openings for auditory tubes, and pharyngeal tonsil. Oropharynx Nonkeratinised stratified No. No. Passageway for both squamous. air and food and drink; contains opening from mouth (fauces). Laryngopharynx __Nonkeratinised stratified No. No. Passageway for both air and squamous. food and drink. 1108 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. LARYNX Nonkeratinised No above No above Passageway for air; stratified squamous folds; folds; contains vocal folds for above the vocal folds; yes below yes below voice production. pseudostratified ciliated folds. folds. columnar below the vocal folds. TRACHEA Pseudostratified ciliated Yes. Yes. Passageway for air; columnar. contains C-shaped rings of cartilage to keep trachea open. BRONCHI Main bronchi Pseudostratified ciliated Yes. Yes. Passageway for air; contain columnar. C-shaped rings of cartilage to maintain patency. Lobar bronchi Pseudostratified ciliated Yes. Yes. Passageway for air; contain columnar. plates of cartilage to maintain patency. Segmental Pseudostratified ciliated Yes. Yes. Passageway for air; contain bronchi columnar. plates of cartilage to maintain patency. Larger Ciliated simple columnar. Yes. Yes. Passageway for air; contain bronchioles more smooth muscle than in the bronchi. Smaller Ciliated simple columnar. Yes. No. Passageway for air; contain bronchioles more smooth muscle than in the larger bronchioles. Terminal Nonciliated simple No. No. Passageway for air; contain bronchioles columnar. more smooth muscle than in the smaller bronchioles. LUNGS Respiratory Simple cuboidal to simple -_ No. No. Passageway for air; gas bronchioles squamous. exchange. Alveolar ducts Simple squamous. No. No. Passageway for air; gas exchange; produce surfactant. Alveoli Simple squamous. No. No. Passageway for air; Conducting structures Respiratory structures gas exchange; produce surfactant to maintain patency. CHECKPOINT 8. Where are the lungs located? Distinguish the parietal pleura from the visceral pleura. 9. Define each of the following parts of a lung: base, apex, costal surface, medial surface, hilum, root, cardiac notch, lobe, and lobule. 10. What is a bronchopulmonary segment? 11. Describe the histology and function of the respiratory membrane. © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. 23.2 Pulmonary venti