23.1 Respiratory system anatomy LEARNING OBJECTIVE 23.1 Describe the anatomical structure and function of the respiratory system components. The respiratory system (RES-pi-ra-t6r-é) consists of the nose, pharynx (throat), larynx (voice box), trachea (windpipe), bronchi, and lungs (figure 23.1). Its parts can be classified according to either structure or function. Structurally, the respiratory system consists of two parts. (1) The upper respiratory system includes the nose, nasal cavity, pharynx, and associated structures; (2) the lower respiratory system includes the larynx, trachea, bronchi, and lungs. Functionally, the respiratory system also consists of two parts. (1) The conducting zone consists of a series of interconnecting cavities and tubes both outside and within the lungs. These include the nose, nasal cavity, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, and terminal bronchioles; their function is to filter, warm, and moisten air and conduct it into the lungs. (2) The respiratory zone consists of tubes and tissues within the lungs where gas exchange occurs. These include the respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli and are the main sites of gas exchange between air and blood. Structures of the respiratory system. | FIGURE 23.1 | T he upper respiratory system includes the nose, nasal cavity, pharynx, and associated structures; the lower respiratory system includes the larynx, trachea, bronchi, and lungs. FUNCTIONS OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 1. Provides for gas exchange: intake of O, for delivery to body cells and removal of CO, produced by body cells. 2. Helps regulate blood pH. 3. Contains receptors for sense of smell, filters inspired air, produces vocal sounds (phonation), and excretes small amounts of water and heat. LARYNX Thyroid gland Right common carotid artery Anterior scalene muscle \<-_ NOSE TRACHEA PHARYNX LARYNX Right subclavian TRACHEA tery Brachiocephalic gg B Left common Subclavian artery Phrenic nerve RIGHT MAIN artery carotid artery BRONCHUS Superior vena cava RIGHT LUNG ; 7 pericardial sac Liver Diaphragm (a) Anterior view showing organs of respiration (b) Anterior view of lungs and heart after removal of the anterolateral thoracic wall and pleura QUESTION What is the site of highest airway flow resistance? The branch of medicine that deals with the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the ears, nose, and throat (ENT) is called otorhinolaryngology (6/-t6-ri'-n6-lar-in-GOL-o0-jé; ofo- = ear; -rhino- = nose; -laryngo- = voice box; -logy = study of). A pulmonologist (pul/-mo-NOL-6-jist) is a specialist in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the lungs. Nose The nose is a specialised organ at the entrance of the respiratory system that consists of a visible external portion and an internal portion inside the skull called the nasal cavity. The external nose is the portion of the nose visible on the face and consists of a supporting framework of bone and hyaline cartilage covered with muscle and skin and lined by a mucous membrane. The frontal bone, nasal bones, and maxillae form the bony framework of the external nose (figure 23.2a). The cartilaginous framework of the external nose consists of several pieces of hyaline cartilage connected to each other and certain skull bones by fibrous © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. connective tissue. The components of the cartilaginous framework are the septal nasal cartilage, which forms the anterior portion of the nasal septum; the Jateral nasal cartilages inferior to the nasal bones; and the alar cartilages (A-lar), which form a portion of the walls of the nostrils. Because it consists of pliable hyaline cartilage, the cartilaginous framework of the external nose is somewhat flexible. On the undersurface of the external nose are two openings called the external nares (NA-rez; singular is naris) or nostrils. The interior structu