 the pharynx THYROID ) CARTILAGE [0] Nasopharynx TRACHEA CRICOID [Bl oropharynx OH Laryngopharynx Oesophagus CARTILAGE THYROID GLAND (b) Parasagittal section of left side of head and neck showing location of respiratory structures Optic nerve Periorbital fat Ethmoidal cells . Superior nasal Superior nasal meatus concha Superior nasal concha Middle nasal i . Superior nasal Nasal septum: concha vreatus Perpendicular | ___ Middle nasal ; plate of meatus Middle nasal ethmoid meatus Maxillary sinus . Inferior nasal concha Vomer Hard palate Inferior nasal concha Middle nasal Inferior nasal concha meatus Inferior nasal Tongue meatus (c) Frontal section showing conchae and meatuses (d) Medial view of sagittal section QUESTION Provide two functions of the paranasal sinuses. 1094 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Surface anatomy of the nos« | FicurE 23.3. | T he external nose has a cartilaginous framework and a bony framework. 2 4 Anterior view 1. Root: Superior attachment of the nose to the frontal bone 2. Apex: Tip of nose 3. Bridge: Bony framework of nose formed by nasal bones 4. External naris: Nostril; external opening into nasal cavity QUESTION Which part of the nose is attached to the frontal bone? CLINICAL CONNECTION Rhinoplasty ated nasal septum. In the procedure, both local and gen- Rhinoplasty (RI-n6-plas/-té; rhino = nose; -plasty = to ral anaesthetics are given. Instruments are then inserted mould or to shape), or 'nose job', is a surgical proce- _ through the nostrils, the nasal cartilage is reshaped, and the dure in which the shape of the external nose is altered. asal bones are fractured and repositioned to achieve the Although rhinoplasty is often done for cosmetic reasons, it desired shape. An internal packing and splint are inserted is sometimes performed to repair a fractured nose oradevi- to keep the nose in the desired position as it heals. CHECKPOINT 1. What functions do the respiratory and cardiovascular systems have in common? 2. What structural and functional features are different in the upper and lower respiratory systems? Which are the same? 3. Compare the structure and functions of the external nose and the internal nose. Pharynx The pharynx (FAR-inks), or throat, is a funnel-shaped tube about 13 cm (5 in.) long that starts at the internal nares and extends to the level of the cricoid cartilage, the most inferior cartilage of the larynx (voice box) (see figure 23.2b). The pharynx lies just posterior to the nasal and oral cavities, superior to the larynx, and just anterior to the cervical vertebrae. Its wall is composed of skeletal muscles and is lined with a mucous membrane. Relaxed skeletal muscles help keep the pharynx patent. Contraction of the skeletal muscles assists in deglutition (swallowing). The pharynx functions as a passageway for air and food, provides a resonating chamber for speech sounds, and houses the tonsils, which participate in immunological reactions against foreign invaders. © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. The pharynx can be divided into three anatomical regions: (1) nasopharynx, (2) oropharynx, and (3) laryngopharynx. (See the lower orientation diagram in figure 23.2b.) The muscles of the entire pharynx are arranged in two layers, an outer circular layer and an inner longitudinal layer. The superior portion of the pharynx, called the nasopharynx, lies posterior to the nasal cavity and extends to the soft palate. The soft palate, which forms the posterior portion of the roof of the mouth, is an arch-shaped muscular partition between the nasopharynx and oropharynx that is lined by mucous membrane. There are five openings in its wall: two internal nares, two openings that lead into the auditory (pharyngotympanic) tubes (commonly known as the eustachian 