lation LEARNING OBJECTIVE 23.2 Describe the events that cause inhalation and exhalation. The process of gas exchange in the body, called respiration, has three basic steps. 1. Pulmonary ventilation (pulmon- = lung), or breathing, is the inhalation (inflow) and exhalation (outflow) of air and involves the exchange of air between the atmosphere and the alveoli of the lungs. 2. External (pulmonary) respiration is the exchange of gases between the alveoli of the lungs and the blood in pulmonary capillaries across the respiratory membrane. In this process, pulmonary capillary blood gains O, and loses CO). 3. Internal (tissue) respiration is the exchange of gases between blood in systemic capillaries and tissue cells. In this step the blood loses O and gains CO}. Within cells, the metabolic reactions that consume O, and give off CO, during the production of ATP are termed cellular respiration (discussed in chapter 25). In pulmonary ventilation, air flows between the atmosphere and the alveoli of the lungs because of alternating pressure differences created by contraction and relaxation of respiratory muscles. The rate of airflow and the amount of effort needed for breathing are also influenced by alveolar surface tension, compliance of the lungs, and airway resistance. Pressure changes during pulmonary ventilation Air moves into the lungs when the air pressure inside the lungs is less than the air pressure in the atmosphere. Air moves out of the lungs when the air pressure inside the lungs is greater than the air pressure in the atmosphere. Inhalation Breathing in is called inhalation (inspiration). Just before each inhalation, the air pressure inside the lungs is equal to the air pressure of the atmosphere, which at sea level is about 760 millimetres of mercury (mmHg), or | atmosphere (atm). For air to flow into the lungs, the pressure inside the alveoli must become lower than the atmospheric pressure. This condition is achieved by increasing the size of the lungs. The pressure of a gas in a closed container is inversely proportional to the volume of the container. This means that if the size of a closed container is increased, the pressure of the gas inside the container decreases, and that if the size of the container is decreased, then the pressure inside it increases. This inverse relationship between volume and pressure, called Boyle's law, may be demonstrated as follows (figure 23.12): Suppose we place a gas in a cylinder that has a movable piston and a pressure gauge, and that the initial pressure created by the gas molecules striking the wall of the container is | atm. If the piston is pushed down, the gas is compressed into a smaller volume, so that the same number of gas molecules strikes less wall area. The gauge shows that the pressure doubles as the gas is compressed to half its original volume. In other words, the same number of molecules in half the volume produces twice the pressure. Conversely, if the piston is raised to increase the volume, the pressure decreases. Thus, the pressure of a gas varies inversely with volume. Differences in pressure caused by changes in lung volume force air into our lungs when we inhale and out when we exhale. For inhalation to occur, the lungs must expand, which increases lung volume and thus decreases the pressure in the lungs to below atmospheric pressure. The first step in expanding the lungs during normal quiet inhalation involves contraction of the main muscle of inhalation, the diaphragm, with resistance from external intercostals (figure 23.13). The most important muscle of inhalation is the diaphragm, the dome-shaped skeletal muscle that forms the floor of the thoracic cavity. It is innervated by fibres of the phrenic nerves, which emerge from the spinal cord at cervical levels 3, 4, and 5. Contraction of the diaphragm causes it to flatten, lowering its dome. This increases the vertical diameter of the thoracic cavity. During normal quiet inhalation, the diaphragm descends ab