ls is an elastic basement membrane. On the outer surface of the alveoli, the lobule's arteriole and venule disperse into a network of blood capillaries (see figure 23.10a) that consist of a single layer of endothelial cells and basement membrane. The exchange of O, and CO, between the air spaces in the lungs and the blood takes place by diffusion across the alveolar and capillary walls, which together form the respiratory membrane. Extending from the alveolar air space to blood plasma, the respiratory membrane consists of four layers (figure 23.1 1b): 1. a layer of type I and type I alveolar cells and associated alveolar macrophages that constitutes the alveolar wall 2. an epithelial basement membrane underlying the alveolar wall 1106 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. 3. a capillary basement membrane that is often fused to the epithelial basement membrane 4. the capillary endothelium. Despite having several layers, the respiratory membrane is very thin - only 0.5 ym thick, about one- sixteenth the diameter of a red blood cell - to allow rapid diffusion of gases. It has been estimated that the lungs contain 300 million alveoli, providing an immense surface area of 70 m? (750 ft') - about the size of a racquetball court - for gas exchange. | FIGURE 23.11 | Structural components of an alveolus. The respiratory membrane consists of a layer of type | and type Il alveolar cells, an epithelial basement membrane, a capillary basement membrane, and the capillary endothelium. The exchange of respiratory gases occurs by diffusion across the respiratory membrane. Monocyte Reticular fibre TYPE II ALVEOLAR (septal) CELL RESPIRATORY MEMBRANE : blood cell oN CAPILLARY ENDOTHELIUM TYPE | ALVEOLAR Gi CAPILLARY CELL BASEMENT pirusion MEMBRANE MACROPHAGE EPITHELIAL (dust cell) | BASEMENT MEMBRANE Red blood cell TYPE | ALVEOLAR in pulmonary CELL capillary Interstitial space Alveolar fluid with surfactant 'a) Section through alveolus showing cellular components etails of respiratory membrane Section th h alveol howii Hlul b) Details of i b ALVEOLAR MACROPHAGE (dust cell) TYPE | ALVEOLAR (Squamous pulmonary epithelial) CELL TYPE Il ALVEOLAR (septal) CELL [Ep 1000x (c) Details of several alveoli QUESTION How thick is the respiratory membrane? © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Blood supply to the lungs The lungs receive blood via two sets of arteries: pulmonary arteries and bronchial arteries. Deoxygenated blood passes through the pulmonary trunk, which divides into a left pulmonary artery that enters the left lung and a right pulmonary artery that enters the right lung. (The pulmonary arteries are the only arteries in the body that carry deoxygenated blood.) Return of the oxygenated blood to the heart occurs by way of the four pulmonary veins, which drain into the left atrium (see figure 21.29). A unique feature of pulmonary blood vessels is their constriction in response to localised hypoxia (low O, level). In all other body tissues, hypoxia causes dilation of blood vessels to increase blood flow. In the lungs, however, vasoconstriction in response to hypoxia diverts pulmonary blood from poorly ventilated areas of the lungs to well-ventilated regions for more efficient gas exchange. This phenomenon is known as ventilation- perfusion coupling (per-FY U-zhun) because the perfusion (blood flow) to each area of the lungs matches the extent of ventilation (airflow) to alveoli in that area. Bronchial arteries, which branch from the aorta, deliver oxygenated blood to the lungs. This blood mainly perfuses the muscular walls of the bronchi and bronchioles. Connections do exist between branches of the bronchial arteries and branches of the pulmonary arteries, however; most blood returns to the heart via pulmonary veins. Some b