he most severe cases, patients require continual oxygen therapy to live. COPD is a disease associated with older adults following a specific long-term exposure to a pollutant. Obstruction of respiratory lung airflow is also associated with untreated lung infection. Of particular concern is tuberculosis (TB). TB is an infection that can lead to long- term lung tissue damage if not treated successfully and often requires more than one antibiotic. When exposure to TB occurs early in life, this can have long-term respiratory consequences. In a recent study, including Australian researchers from the University , lung function was assessed in a population of low socioeconomic individuals living , Peru.° The study compared those who had known drug susceptible or multi-drug resistance TB to a matched control group who were also living . Interestingly, although clinically cured, the patients who had previous TB demonstrated poorer lung function compared to the controls. The cured 'drug susceptible' TB patients had airflow difficulties while those with 'multi-drug ~ 'ae resistance' TB not only had airflow issues but also a reducedlung volume. Both reduced lung volume and air- flowobstruction are indicators of reduced lung function and therefore limit the successful ventilation of the alveoli. The study's findings indicate that an early diagnosis and successful treatment is critical for minimising the long-term damage. TB rates and New Zealand are some of the lowest in the world and cases are regarded as serious when they arise. Airway resistance Like the flow of blood through blood vessels, the rate of airflow through the airways depends on both the pressure difference and the resistance: airflow equals the pressure difference between the alveoli and the atmosphere divided by the resistance. The walls of the airways, especially the bronchioles, offer some resistance to the normal flow of air into and out of the lungs. As the lungs expand during inhalation, the bronchioles enlarge because their walls are pulled outward in all directions. Larger diameter airways have decreased resistance. Airway resistance then increases during exhalation as the diameter of bronchioles decreases. Airway diameter is also regulated by the degree of contraction or relaxation of smooth muscle in the walls of the airways. Signals from the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system cause relaxation of this smooth muscle, which results in bronchodilation and decreased resistance. Any condition that narrows or obstructs the airways increases resistance, so that more pressure is required to maintain the same airflow. The hallmark of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) - emphysema or chronic bronchitis - is increased airway resistance due to obstruction or collapse of airways. Breathing patterns and modified breathing movements The term for the normal pattern of quiet breathing is eupnea (a@p-NE-a; eu- = good, easy, or normal; -pnea = breath). Eupnea can consist of shallow, deep, or combined shallow and deep breathing. A pattern of shallow (chest) breathing, called costal breathing, consists of an upward and outward movement of the chest due to contraction of the external intercostal muscles. A pattern of deep (abdominal) breathing, called diaphragmatic breathing (di! -a-frag-MAT-ik), consists of the outward movement of the abdomen due to the contraction and descent of the diaphragm. 1114 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Breathing also provides humans with methods for expressing emotions such as laughing, sighing, and sobbing and can be used to expel foreign matter from the lower air passages through actions such as sneezing and coughing. Breathing movements are also modified and controlled during talking and singing. Some of the modified breathing movements that express emotion or clear the airways a