he chest was restricted by a non-elastic strapping. Carrying the load on the torso did not reduce maximal aerobic power, however, it did reduce the total time participants could sustain exercise. Most interest- ingly, as the backpack arrangement restricted the ribcage, breathing frequency was favoured over tidal volume (depth) in order to achieve the required ventilation to exercise. Ratings of dsypnea were also increased during load car- riage; this was also partly evident during chest strapping, demonstrating that the load carried around the torso restricts the movement of the ribs during inhalation. For a soldier conducting their daily duties, the requirement of carrying very heavy loads on the torso means that the respiratory muscles, including the diaphragm, the external intercostal, and the accessory muscle of respirations, must work harder in order to achieve the necessary lung ven- tilation. Further research is underway to identify potential respiratory training techniques to enhance the 'athlete' soldier capacity to carry very heavy loads. CHECKPOINT 16. What is a spirometer? 17. What is the difference between a lung volume and a lung capacity? 18. How is minute ventilation calculated? 19. Define alveolar ventilation rate and FEV; 9. 23.4 Exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide LEARNING OBJECTIVE 23.4 Understand the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide, including the involvement 's and Henry's laws. The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between alveolar air and pulmonary blood occurs via passive diffusion, which is governed by the behaviour of gases as described by two gas laws, Dalton's law and Henry's law. Dalton's law is important for understanding how gases move down their pressure gradients by diffusion, and Henry's law helps explain how the solubility of a gas relates to its diffusion. Gas laws: Dalton's law and Henry's law According 's law, each gas in a mixture of gases exerts its own pressure as if no other gases were present. The pressure of a specific gas in a mixture is called its partial pressure (P,); the subscript is the chemical formula of the gas. The total pressure of the mixture is calculated simply by adding all of the partial pressures. Atmospheric air is a mixture of gases - nitrogen (N,), oxygen (O}), argon (Ar), carbon dioxide (CO), variable amounts of water vapour (H,O), plus other gases present in small quantities. Atmospheric pressure is the sum of the pressures of all of these gases: Atmospheric pressure (760 mmHg) =Py, +Po, + Pa, + Puyo + Peo, + Pother gases We can determine the partial pressure exerted by each component in the mixture by multiplying the percentage of the gas in the mixture by the total pressure of the mixture. Atmospheric air is 78.6% nitrogen, 20.9% oxygen, 0.093% argon, 0.04% carbon dioxide, and 0.06% other gases; a variable amount of water vapour is also present. The amount of water varies from practically 0% over a desert to 4% over the ocean, to about 0.4% on a cool, dry day. Thus, the partial pressures of the gases in inhaled air are as follows. Py, = 0.786 x 760 mmHg = 597.4 mmHg Po, = 0.209 x 760 mmHg = 158.8 mmHg Py, = 0.0009 x 760 mmHg = 0.7 mmHg Pio = 0.003 x 760 mmHg = 2.3 mmHg Poo, = 0.0004 x 760 mmHg = 0.3 mmHg Pother gases = 9.0006 x 760 mmHg = 0.5 mmHg Total = 760.0 mmHg These partial pressures determine the movement of O, and CO, between the atmosphere and lungs, between the lungs and blood, and between the blood and body cells. Each gas diffuses across a permeable 1118 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. membrane from the area where its partial pressure is greater to the area where its partial pressure is less. The greater the difference in partial pressure, the faster the rate of diffusion. Compared with inhaled air, alveolar air has less O7 (13.6% versus 20.9%) and more CO, (5.2% versus 0.04%) for two reasons. First,