ee lobar bronchi called the superior, middle, and inferior lobar bronchi, and the left main bronchus gives rise to superior and inferior lobar bronchi. Within the lung, the lobar bronchi give rise to the segmental bronchi, which are constant in both origin and distribution - there are 10 segmental bronchi in each lung. The segment of lung tissue that each segmental bronchus supplies is called a bronchopulmonary segment (brong-ko- PUL-m6-nar-é). Bronchial and pulmonary disorders (such as tumours or abscesses) that are localised in a bronchopulmonary segment may be surgically removed without seriously disrupting the surrounding lung tissue. Each bronchopulmonary segment of the lungs has many small compartments called lobules; each lobule is wrapped in elastic connective tissue and contains a lymphatic vessel, an arteriole, a venule, and a branch from a terminal bronchiole (figure 23.10a). Terminal bronchioles subdivide into microscopic branches called respiratory bronchioles (figure 23.10b). They also have alveoli (described shortly) budding from their walls. Alveoli participate in gas exchange, and thus respiratory bronchioles begin the respiratory zone of the respiratory system. As the respiratory bronchioles penetrate more deeply into the lungs, the epithelial lining changes from simple cuboidal to simple squamous. Respiratory bronchioles in turn subdivide into several (2-11) alveolar ducts (al-VE-6-lar), which consist of simple squamous epithelium. The respiratory passages from the trachea to the alveolar ducts contain about 25 orders of branching; branching from the trachea into primary bronchi is called first-order branching, that from main bronchi into lobar bronchi is called second-order branching, and so on down to the alveolar ducts. © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. Microscopic anatomy of a lobule of the lungs. Alveolar sacs consist of two or more alveoli that share a common opening. Terminal bronchiole Pulmonary Pulmonary arteriole venule -_ Lymphatic vessel Terminal 5 ? RESPIRATORY bronchiole Elastic - gj BRONCHIOLE connective tissue =~ ALVEOLI ceil R vessel ALVEOLAR DUCTS RESPIRATORY BRONCHIOLE ALVEOLAR DUCTS Pulmonary capillary ALVEOLI . ALVEOLAR Visceral SAC ata 4 : pleura YY < ALVEOLAR ALVEOLI x leura Lie Nhe pl about 30x (a) Diagram of portion of lobule of lung (b) Lung lobule QUESTION What types of cells make up the wall of an alveolus? Alveoli Around the circumference of the alveolar ducts are numerous alveoli and alveolar sacs. An alveolus (al- VE-6-lus) is a cup-shaped outpouching lined by simple squamous epithelium and supported by a thin elastic basement membrane; an alveolar sac consists of two or more alveoli that share a common opening (figure 23.10a, b). The walls of alveoli consist of two types of alveolar epithelial cells (figure 23.11). The more numerous type J alveolar (squamous pulmonary epithelial) cells are simple squamous epithelial cells that form a nearly continuous lining of the alveolar wall. Type I alveolar cells, also called septal cells, are fewer in number and are found between type I alveolar cells. The thin type I alveolar cells are the main sites of gas exchange. Type II alveolar cells, rounded or cuboidal epithelial cells with free surfaces containing microvilli, secrete alveolar fluid, which keeps the surface between the cells and the air moist. Included in the alveolar fluid is surfactant (sur-FAK-tant), a complex mixture of phospholipids and lipoproteins. Surfactant lowers the surface tension of alveolar fluid, which reduces the tendency of alveoli to collapse and thus maintains their patency (described later). Associated with the alveolar wall are alveolar macrophages (dust cells), phagocytes that remove fine dust particles and other debris from the alveolar spaces. Also present are fibroblasts that produce reticular and elastic fibres. Underlying the layer of type I alveolar cel