ne respiratory group related to the control of breathing? Regulation of the respiratory centre Activity of the respiratory centre can be modified in response to inputs from other brain regions, receptors in the peripheral nervous system, and other factors in order to maintain the homeostasis of breathing. 1130 Principles of anatomy and physiology © John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. Not for resale or distribution. Any unauthorised distribution or use will result in legal action. | FicuRi = 29.24 | Roles of the medullary respiratory centre in controlling (a) normal quiet breathing and (b) f orceful breathing. During normal quiet breathing, the ventral respiratory group is inactive; during forceful breathing, the dorsal respiratory group activates the ventral respiratory group. Activates . Ventral respiratory Ventral respiratory Dorsal respiratory group (DRG) Dorsal > neamametieny group (VRG) group (VRG) Active Inactive roup (DRG) (forceful inhalation (forceful exhalation group neurons) neurons) ! 2 seconds ye seconds i i Diaphragm relaxes Diaphragm RSSSSETY LISS Gi Accessory muscles exhalation (internal contracts and and external contracts and of inhalation Ineneasiell, Osea out nite ut (sternocleidomastoid, oblique, internal intercostal become less active intercostal aan. eral , obli ue annem muscles contract and relax, followed muscles contract estas anor A atonafatts aml during their most by elastic recoil during their most Pp ao active phase of lungs active stage muscles) contract rectus abdominis muscles) contract | + a | onal GE Retail Gui Forceful inhalation Forceful exhalation inhalation exhalation (a) During normal quiet breathing (b) During forceful breathing QUESTION Which nerves convey impulses from the respiratory centre to the diaphragm? Cortical influences on breathing Because the cerebral cortex has connections with the respiratory centre, we can voluntarily alter our pattern of breathing. We can even refuse to breathe at all for a short time. Voluntary control is protective because it enables us to prevent water or irritating gases from entering the lungs. The ability to not breathe, however, is limited by the buildup of CO and H* in the body. When Pco, and H" concentrations increase to a certain level, the DRG neurons of the medullary respiratory centre are strongly stimulated, nerve impulses are sent along the phrenic and intercostal nerves to inspiratory muscles, and breathing resumes, whether the person wants it to or not. It is impossible for small children to kill themselves by voluntarily holding their breath, even though many have tried in order to get their way. If breath is held long enough to cause fainting, breathing resumes when consciousness is lost. Nerve impulses from the hypothalamus and limbic system also stimulate the respiratory centre, allowing emotional stimuli to alter breathing as, for example, in laughing and crying. Chemoreceptor regulation of breathing Certain chemical stimuli modulate how quickly and how deeply we breathe. The respiratory system functions to maintain proper levels of CO, and O, and is very responsive to changes in the levels of these gases in body fluids. We introduced sensory neurons that are responsive to chemicals, calle chemoreceptors (ké/-m6-ré-SEP-tors), in chapter 21. Chemoreceptors in two locations of the respiratory system monitor levels of CO, H*, and O, and provide input to the respiratory centre (figure 23.25). Central chemoreceptors are located in or near the medulla oblongata in the central nervous system. They respon to changes in H* concentration ,> or both, in cerebrospinal fluid. Peripheral chemoreceptors are located in the aortic bodies, clusters of chemoreceptors located in the wall of the arch of the aorta, and in the carotid bodies, which are oval nodules in the wall of the left and right common caroti arteries where they divide into the internal and external carotid arteries. (The chemoreceptors of the aortic bodies are located close to the aort