 gas exchange in the alveoli increases the CO, content and decreases the O, content of alveolar air. Second, when air is inhaled it becomes humidified as it passes along the moist mucosal linings. As water vapour content of the air increases, the relative percentage that is O, decreases. In contrast, exhaled air contains more O, than alveolar air (16% versus 13.6%) and less CO, (4.5% versus 5.2%) because some of the exhaled air was in the anatomic dead space and did not participate in gas exchange. Exhaled air is a mixture of alveolar air and inhaled air that was in the anatomic dead space. Henry's law states that the quantity of a gas that will dissolve in a liquid is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas and its solubility. In body fluids, the ability of a gas to stay in solution is greater when its partial pressure is higher and when it has a high solubility in water. The higher the partial pressure of a gas over a liquid and the higher the solubility, the more gas will stay in solution. In comparison to oxygen, much more CO, is dissolved in blood plasma because the solubility of CO, is 24 times greater than that of O,. Even though the air we breathe contains mostly N5, this gas has no known effect on bodily functions, and at sea level pressure very little of it dissolves in blood plasma because its solubility is very low. An everyday experience gives a demonstration 's law. You have probably noticed that a soft drink makes a hissing sound when the top of the container is removed, and bubbles rise to the surface for some time afterwards. The gas dissolved in carbonated beverages is CO. Because the soft drink is bottled or canned under high pressure and capped, the CO, remains dissolved as long as the container is unopened. Once you remove the cap, the pressure decreases and the gas begins to bubble out of solution. Henry's law explains two conditions resulting from changes in the solubility of nitrogen in body fluids. Even though the air we breathe contains about 79% nitrogen, this gas has no known effect on bodily functions, and very little of it dissolves in blood plasma because of its low solubility at sea level pressure. As the total air pressure increases, the partial pressures of all of its gases increase. When a scuba diver breathes air under high pressure, the nitrogen in the mixture can have serious negative effects. Because the partial pressure of nitrogen is higher in a mixture of compressed air than in air at sea level pressure, a considerable amount of nitrogen dissolves in plasma and interstitial fluid. Excessive amounts of dissolved nitrogen may produce giddiness and other symptoms similar to alcohol intoxication. The condition is called nitrogen narcosis or 'rapture of the deep'. Ifa diver comes to the surface slowly, the dissolved nitrogen can be eliminated by exhaling it. However, if the ascent is too rapid, nitrogen comes out of solution too quickly and forms gas bubbles in the tissues, resulting in decompression sickness (the bends). The effects of decompression sickness typically result from bubbles in nervous tissue and can be mild or severe, depending on the number of bubbles formed. Symptoms include joint pain, especially in the arms and legs, dizziness, shortness of breath, extreme fatigue, paralysis, and unconsciousness. CLINICAL CONNECTION Hyperbaric oxygenation is placed in a hyperbaric chamber, which contains O, at a A major clinical application 's law is hyperbaric | Pressure greater than 1 atmosphere (760 mmHg). As body oxygenation (hyper- = over; -baros = pressure), the use _ tissues pick up the Op, the bacteria are killed. Hyperbaric of pressure to cause more O, to dissolve in the blood. It | chambers may also be used for treating certain heart dis- is an effective technique in treating patients infected , carbon monoxide poisoning, gas embolisms, crush anaerobic bacteria, such as those that cause tetanus and _ injuries, cerebral oedema, certain hard-to-treat bone infec- gangrene. 