Inflammation of the vocal folds can cause hoarseness or loss of voice by interfering with their contraction or by making them swell so they cannot vibrate freely. Chronic inflammation can lead to permanent hoarseness. Laryngeal cancer is found almost exclusively in smokers and is characterized by hoarseness, pain on swallowing, or pain radiating to the ear. Treatment typically involves radiation therapy and/or surgery. When the vocal folds cannot vibrate freely, voice is impaired.

The structures of voice production

The mucous membrane of the larynx forms two pairs of folds: the superior vestibular folds (false vocal cords) and the inferior vocal folds (true vocal cords). The space between the vestibular folds is the rima vestibuli. The laryngeal ventricle is a lateral expansion of the middle portion of the laryngeal cavity, located inferior to the vestibular folds and superior to the vocal folds. While the vestibular folds do not function in voice production, they have other important roles. When the vestibular folds are brought together, they help hold the breath against pressure in the thoracic cavity, such as might occur when a person strains to lift a heavy object.

The vocal folds are the principal structures of voice production. Deep to the mucous membrane of the vocal folds, which is nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium, lie bands of elastic ligaments stretched between the rigid cartilages of the larynx, like the strings of a guitar. Intrinsic laryngeal muscles attach to both the rigid cartilages and the vocal folds. When these muscles contract, they move the cartilages, pulling the elastic ligaments tight and stretching the vocal folds out into the airways so that the rima glottidis is narrowed. Contracting and relaxing the muscles varies the tension in the vocal folds, much like tightening or loosening a guitar string. Air passing through the larynx vibrates the folds and produces sound (phonation) by setting up sound waves in the column of air in the pharynx, nose, and mouth. The pitch of the sound is related to the tension in the vocal folds: the greater the tension, the higher the pitch. The louder the sound, the greater the air pressure driving the vibration.

When the intrinsic muscles of the larynx contract, they pull on the arytenoid cartilages, causing the cartilages to pivot and slide. Contraction of the posterior cricoarytenoid muscles moves the vocal folds apart (abduction), thereby opening the rima glottidis. By contrast, contraction of the lateral cricoarytenoid muscles moves the vocal folds together (adduction), thereby closing the rima glottidis. Other intrinsic muscles can elongate (and place tension on) or shorten (and relax) the vocal folds.

Movement of the vocal folds

The glottis consists of a pair of folds of mucous membrane in the larynx (the vocal folds) and the space between them (the rima glottidis).

Question: What is the main function of the vocal folds?

Pitch is controlled by the tension on the vocal folds. If the folds are pulled taut by the muscles, they vibrate more rapidly, producing a higher pitch. Decreasing the muscular tension on the vocal folds causes them to vibrate more slowly and produce a lower-pitched sound.