The external nose serves three functions: (1) warming, moistening, and filtering incoming air; (2) detecting olfactory stimuli; and (3) modifying speech vibrations as they pass through the large, hollow resonating chambers. Resonance refers to prolonging, amplifying, or modifying a sound by vibration.

The nasal cavity is a large space in the anterior part of the skull, lying inferior to the nasal bones and superior to the oral cavity, and it is lined with muscle and mucous membrane. A vertical partition, the nasal septum, divides the nasal cavity into right and left sides. The anterior portion of the nasal septum consists primarily of hyaline cartilage; the remainder is formed by the vomer, the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid, the maxillae, and the palatine bones. Anteriorly, the nasal cavity merges with the external nose, and posteriorly it communicates with the pharynx through two openings called the internal nares, or choanae. Ducts from the paranasal sinuses, which drain mucus, and the nasolacrimal ducts, which drain tears, also open into the nasal cavity. Paranasal sinuses are mucosa-lined cavities in certain cranial and facial bones that are continuous with the lining of the nasal cavity. The bones housing the paranasal sinuses are the frontal, sphenoid, ethmoid, and maxillae. Besides producing mucus, the paranasal sinuses serve as resonating chambers for sound as we speak or sing. The lateral walls of the internal nose are formed by the ethmoid, maxilla, lacrimal, palatine, and inferior nasal conchae bones, with the ethmoid bone also forming the roof. The palatine bones and the palatine processes of the maxillae, which together constitute the hard palate, form the floor of the internal nose.

CLINICAL CONNECTION Limiting COVID-19 viral transmission with face masks

As a respiratory pump, the breath-by-breath ventilation of the alveoli ranges from as little as 5 L/min to greater than 200 L/min during increased metabolic demand such as exercise. Transmission of the internal environment of the body is expelled during the expiratory phase of the breathing cycle. Infectious transmission, such as with the common cold and flu viruses, usually fluctuates seasonally, with increased transmission throughout the population in the winter months. No doubt the flu virus has historically been deadly, impacting the most vulnerable. Yet, when the COVID-19 pandemic emerged, it quickly became evident that its infectious potential, primarily via expired air from the lungs, required a modified approach to reducing or eliminating aerosol and droplet contact. Most interestingly, mapping of droplet spread showed that a 1.5 metre distance between two people reduced the chance of infection spread; however, in activities such as exercise these droplets could travel much further, powered by the more rapidly expired air and forceful breathing. Face-mask technology, to control and capture respiratory ventilation, already existed in medical, emergency, and occupationally dangerous environments such as mining. The primary objective had been to protect the wearer from inhaling infectious or dangerous airborne particles. Yet, the emerging public health challenge posed by COVID-19 required a determination of the effectiveness of simple cloth or polyester masks both in terms of protecting the wearer from infected others, and in reducing the expired droplets of the wearer in the event they were infected with no obvious symptoms. Cloth masks, with two to three layers, are deemed to be most effective, especially when changed on a regular basis to prevent the material being saturated. Given that exercise does require increased air movement in and out of the lungs, it has been important to determine what effect wearing a face mask has on performing exercise per se. Acknowledging the short time frame to conduct and publish such data, early indications regarding their impact on exercise remain under study.