In the most severe cases, patients require continual oxygen therapy to live. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a disease commonly seen in older adults and is linked to long-term exposure to pollutants. Airflow obstruction can also arise from untreated lung infections. Of particular concern is tuberculosis (TB). TB is an infection that can cause lasting damage to lung tissue if not treated successfully, and it often requires more than one antibiotic. When exposure to TB occurs early in life, this can have long-term respiratory consequences.

In a recent study involving Australian researchers from a university, lung function was assessed in a population of low-socioeconomic-status individuals living in Peru. The study compared people with known drug-susceptible TB or multidrug-resistant TB to a matched control group from the same community. Interestingly, although clinically cured, those who had prior TB showed poorer lung function than the controls. Those with cured drug-susceptible TB had airflow difficulties, while those with multidrug-resistant TB had both airflow issues and reduced lung volume. Both reduced lung volume and airway obstruction are indicators of diminished lung function and limit the effective ventilation of the alveoli. The study’s findings indicate that early diagnosis and successful treatment are critical for minimizing long-term damage. TB rates in New Zealand are among the lowest in the world, and when cases do arise they are treated seriously.

Airway resistance
Like the flow of blood through vessels, the rate of airflow through the airways depends on both the pressure difference and the resistance: airflow equals the pressure difference between the alveoli and the atmosphere divided by the resistance. The walls of the airways, especially the bronchioles, offer some resistance to the normal flow of air into and out of the lungs. As the lungs expand during inhalation, the bronchioles enlarge because their walls are pulled outward in all directions. Larger-diameter airways have decreased resistance. Airway resistance increases during exhalation as the bronchioles narrow. Airway diameter is also regulated by the degree of contraction or relaxation of smooth muscle in the walls of the airways. Signals from the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system cause relaxation of this smooth muscle, which results in bronchodilation and decreased resistance. Any condition that narrows or obstructs the airways increases resistance, so more pressure is required to maintain the same airflow. The hallmark of asthma or COPD—emphysema or chronic bronchitis—is increased airway resistance due to obstruction or collapse of the airways.

Breathing patterns and modified breathing movements
The normal pattern of quiet breathing is eupnea. Eupnea can consist of shallow, deep, or a combination of shallow and deep breathing. A pattern of shallow (chest) breathing, called costal breathing, involves an upward and outward movement of the chest due to contraction of the external intercostal muscles. A pattern of deep (abdominal) breathing, called diaphragmatic breathing, consists of the outward movement of the abdomen as the diaphragm contracts and moves downward.

Breathing also provides humans with methods for expressing emotions such as laughing, sighing, and sobbing, and can be used to expel foreign matter from the lower air passages through actions such as sneezing and coughing. Breathing movements are also modified and controlled during talking and singing. Some of these modified breathing movements express emotion or clear the airways.