23.3 Lung volumes and capacities

Learning objective 23.3: Differentiate between the different lung volumes and capacities.

At rest, a healthy adult averages 12 breaths per minute, and each inhalation and exhalation moves about 500 mL of air into and out of the lungs. The volume of one breath is the tidal volume (Vt). The minute ventilation (MV)—the total volume of air inhaled and exhaled each minute—is the respiratory rate multiplied by tidal volume: MV = 12 breaths/min × 500 mL/breath ≈ 6 litres/min. A value lower than normal minute ventilation usually signals pulmonary malfunction.

The apparatus commonly used to measure the volume of air exchanged during breathing and the respiratory rate is a spirometer or respirometer. The record produced is a spirogram. Inhalation is recorded as an upward deflection, and exhalation as a downward deflection. The spirogram of lung volumes and capacities is interpreted from the start of the record to the end.

Tidal volume varies considerably from one person to another and in the same person at different times. In a typical adult, about 70% of the tidal volume (approximately 350 mL) actually reaches the respiratory zone—the respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli—and participates in external respiration. The remaining 30% (about 150 mL) stays in the conducting airways of the nose, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, and terminal bronchioles. Collectively, the conducting airways with air that does not undergo respiratory exchange are known as the anatomic (respiratory) dead space. A handy rule of thumb for determining the volume of the anatomic dead space is that it is about the same in milliliters as your ideal body weight in pounds. Not all of the minute ventilation can be used in gas exchange because some air remains in the anatomic dead space. The alveolar ventilation rate is the volume of air per minute that actually reaches the respiratory zone. In the example given, the alveolar ventilation rate would be 350 mL/breath × 12 breaths/min = 4,200 mL/min.

Several other lung volumes are defined relative to forceful breathing. In general, these volumes are larger in males, taller individuals, and younger adults, and smaller in females, shorter individuals, and the elderly. Various disorders may be diagnosed by comparing actual values with predicted normal values for a patient's gender, height, and age. The values given here are averages for young adults. By taking a very deep breath, you can inhale more than 500 mL, and this additional air—the inspiratory reserve volume—is the extra amount that can be drawn into the lungs beyond the tidal volume.

Question A
A 19-year-old male student has a vital capacity of 5 L, tidal volume of 0.5 L, inspiratory capacity of 3.5 L, and functional residual capacity of 2.5 L. What is his expiratory reserve volume?

Tidal volume varies considerably from one person to another and in the same person at different times. In a typical adult, about 70% of the tidal volume (approximately 350 mL) actually reaches the respiratory zone of the respiratory system—the respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli—and participates in external respiration. The other 30% (about 150 mL) remains in the conducting airways of the nose, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, and terminal bronchioles. Collectively, the conducting airways with air that does not undergo respiratory exchange are known as the anatomic (respiratory) dead space. (An easy rule of thumb for determining the volume of your anatomic dead space is that it is about the same in milliliters as your ideal weight in pounds.) Not all of the minute ventilation can be used in gas exchange because some of it remains in the anatomic dead space. The alveolar ventilation rate is the volume of air per minute that actually reaches the respiratory zone. In the example just given, the alveolar ventilation rate would be 350 mL/breath × 12 breaths/min = 4,200 mL/min.

Several other lung volumes are defined relative to forceful breathing. In general, these volumes are larger in males, taller individuals, and younger adults, and smaller in females, shorter individuals, and the elderly. Various disorders also may be diagnosed by comparison of actual and predicted normal values for a patient’s gender, height, and age. The values given here are averages for young adults. By taking a very deep breath, you can inhale a good deal more than 500 mL. This additional inhaled air, called the inspiratory reserve volume, is the extra amount of air that can be inhaled beyond the tidal volume.