Locations and functions: the medullary respiratory centre in the medulla oblongata and the pontine respiratory group in the pons.

Medullary respiratory centre

The medullary respiratory centre comprises two neuron groups: the dorsal respiratory group (DRG), formerly known as the inspiratory area, and the ventral respiratory group (VRG), formerly known as the expiratory area. During normal quiet breathing, neurons of the DRG generate impulses that travel to the diaphragm via the phrenic nerves and to the external intercostal muscles via the intercostal nerves. These impulses are released in bursts that begin weakly, increase in strength for about two seconds, and then stop altogether. When the nerve impulses reach the diaphragm and external intercostals, the muscles contract and inhalation occurs. When the DRG becomes inactive after about two seconds, the diaphragm and external intercostals relax for about three seconds, allowing the passive recoil of the lungs and thoracic wall. Then the cycle repeats itself.

Within the VRG there is a cluster of neurons called the pre-Bötzinger complex, believed to be important in the generation of the rhythm of breathing. This rhythm generator, analogous to the heart’s pacemaker, is composed of pacemaker cells that set the basic rhythm of breathing. The exact mechanism of these pacemaker cells is unknown and remains the topic of ongoing research. However, it is thought that the pacemaker cells provide input to the DRG, driving the rate at which DRG neurons fire. The remaining neurons of the VRG do not participate in normal quiet breathing.

The VRG becomes activated when forceful breathing is required, such as during exercise, when playing a wind instrument, or at high altitudes. During forceful inhalation, nerve impulses from the DRG not only stimulate the diaphragm and external intercostal muscles to contract, but also activate neurons of the VRG involved in forceful inhalation to send impulses to the accessory muscles of inhalation—the sternocleidomastoid, scalenes, and pectoralis minor. Contraction of these muscles results in forceful inhalation. During forceful exhalation, the DRG is inactive along with the VRG neurons that participate in forceful inhalation, but neurons of the VRG involved in forceful exhalation send nerve impulses to the accessory muscles of exhalation—the internal intercostals, external oblique, internal oblique, transversus abdominis, and rectus abdominis. Contraction of these muscles results in forceful exhalation.

Pontine respiratory group

The pontine respiratory group (PRG), formerly called the pneumotaxic area, is a collection of neurons in the pons. The neurons in the PRG are active during inhalation and exhalation. The PRG transmits nerve impulses to the DRG in the medulla. The PRG may play a role in both inhalation and exhalation by modifying the basic rhythm of breathing generated by the VRG, such as when exercising, speaking, or sleeping.

CHECKPOINT 27. How does the medullary respiratory centre regulate breathing? 28. How is the pontine respiratory group involved in regulation of breathing?