Gas exchange in the alveoli raises the CO2 content and lowers the O2 content of alveolar air. When air is inhaled, it is humidified as it travels along the moist mucosal linings. As the water vapor content of the air increases, the relative percentage of O2 decreases. In contrast, exhaled air contains more O2 than alveolar air (about 16% versus 13.6%) and less CO2 (about 4.5% versus 5.2%), because some of the air we exhale came from the anatomic dead space and did not participate in gas exchange. Exhaled air is thus a mixture of alveolar air and inhaled air that was in the dead space.

Henry's law states that the quantity of a gas dissolved in a liquid is proportional to the partial pressure of the gas and its solubility. In body fluids, a gas remains in solution more readily when its partial pressure is higher and when it has higher solubility in water. The higher the partial pressure of a gas over a liquid and the greater its solubility, the more gas stays in solution. Compared with oxygen, much more CO2 dissolves in blood plasma because the solubility of CO2 is about 24 times greater than that of O2. Although the air we breathe contains mostly nitrogen, this gas has no known effect on bodily functions, and at sea level pressure very little of it dissolves in blood plasma because its solubility is very low.

An everyday experience demonstrates Henry's law. You may have noticed that a soft drink hisses when the cap is removed and bubbles rise to the surface for a time afterwards. The gas dissolved in carbonated beverages is CO2. Because the soft drink is bottled or canned under high pressure and capped, CO2 remains dissolved as long as the container is unopened. Once you remove the cap, the pressure falls and the gas begins to bubble out of solution.

Henry's law also explains two conditions that arise from changes in the solubility of nitrogen in body fluids. Although the air we breathe contains about 79% nitrogen, this gas has no known effect on bodily functions, and very little of it dissolves in blood plasma because of its low solubility at sea level pressure. As the total air pressure increases, the partial pressures of all of its gases increase. When a scuba diver breathes air under high pressure, the nitrogen in the gas mixture can have serious effects. Because the partial pressure of nitrogen is higher under compressed air than at sea level, a considerable amount of nitrogen dissolves in plasma and interstitial fluid. Excessive dissolved nitrogen can produce giddiness and other symptoms similar to alcohol intoxication. This condition is called nitrogen narcosis, or “rapture of the deep.” If a diver ascends slowly, the dissolved nitrogen can be eliminated by exhalation. If, however, the ascent is too rapid, nitrogen comes out of solution too quickly and forms gas bubbles in the tissues, resulting in decompression sickness, or the bends. Decompression sickness effects typically arise from bubbles in nervous tissue and can range from mild to severe, depending on the number of bubbles formed. Symptoms include joint pain (especially in the arms and legs), dizziness, shortness of breath, extreme fatigue, paralysis, and unconsciousness.

CLINICAL CONNECTION
Hyperbaric oxygenation is achieved in a hyperbaric chamber, which contains oxygen at a pressure greater than 1 atmosphere (760 mmHg). A major clinical application of this approach—often framed by Henry’s law—is to increase the amount of dissolved O2 in the blood and thereby improve tissue oxygenation and help kill anaerobic bacteria. Hyperbaric chambers may also be used for treating carbon monoxide poisoning, gas embolisms, crush injuries, cerebral edema, and certain hard-to-treat bone infections, including gangrene.