Internal respiration

When this happens, the PO2 declines and the PCO2 rises in systemic capillary blood as O2 leaves the bloodstream and CO2 from tissue cells enters it. The left ventricle pumps oxygenated blood into the aorta and through the systemic arteries to the systemic capillaries. The exchange of O2 and CO2 between systemic capillaries and tissue cells is called internal respiration or systemic gas exchange. As O2 leaves the blood, oxygenated blood becomes deoxygenated. Unlike external respiration, which occurs only in the lungs, internal respiration occurs in tissues throughout the body. The PO2 of blood entering the systemic capillaries is higher (about 100 mmHg) than the PO2 in tissue cells (about 40 mmHg at rest) because the cells constantly use O2 to produce ATP. Due to this pressure difference, O2 diffuses out of the capillaries into tissue cells, and the PO2 in the blood drops to about 40 mmHg by the time the blood exits the systemic capillaries. Meanwhile, CO2 diffuses from tissue cells into the systemic capillaries. Because tissue cells are constantly producing CO2, the PCO2 of the cells (about 45 mmHg at rest) is higher than that of the systemic capillary blood (about 40 mmHg). As a result, CO2 diffuses from tissue cells through interstitial fluid into the systemic capillaries until the PCO2 in the blood increases to about 45 mmHg. The deoxygenated blood then returns to the heart and is pumped to the lungs for another cycle of external respiration.

In a person at rest, tissue cells, on average, need only about 25% of the available O2 in oxygenated blood; despite its name, deoxygenated blood retains about 75% of its O2 content. During exercise, more O2 diffuses from the blood into metabolically active cells, such as contracting skeletal muscle fibers. Active cells use more O2 for ATP production, causing the O2 content of deoxygenated blood to drop below 75%.

The rate of pulmonary and systemic gas exchange depends on several factors.

Partial pressure difference of the gases
Alveolar PO2 must be higher than blood PO2 for oxygen to diffuse from alveolar air into the blood. The rate of diffusion is faster when the difference between PO2 in alveolar air and in pulmonary capillary blood is larger; diffusion is slower when the difference is smaller. The differences in PO2 and PCO2 between alveolar air and alveolar blood increase during exercise, accelerating diffusion. The partial pressures of O2 and CO2 in alveolar air also depend on the rate of airflow into and out of the lungs. Certain drugs (such as morphine) slow ventilation, thereby decreasing the amount of O2 and CO2 that can be exchanged between alveolar air and blood.

Altitude
With increasing altitude, the total atmospheric pressure decreases, as does the partial pressure of O2—from about 159 mmHg at sea level to about 110 mmHg at 10,000 feet, and about 73 mmHg at 20,000 feet. Although O2 remains 20.9% of the total, the PO2 of inspired air decreases with increasing altitude. Alveolar PO2 decreases accordingly, and O2 diffuses into the blood more slowly. The common signs and symptoms of high-altitude sickness—shortness of breath, headache, fatigue, insomnia, nausea, and dizziness—are due to the lower level of oxygen in the blood.

Surface area available for gas exchange
As you learned earlier, the surface area of the alveoli is enormous—about 70 m² (approximately 750 ft²). In addition, many capillaries surround each alveolus, so a large volume of blood participates in gas exchange at any given moment (as much as about 900 mL). Any pulmonary disorder that decreases the functional surface area of the respiratory membranes lowers the rate of external respiration. For example, in emphysema alveolar walls disintegrate, reducing surface area and slowing pulmonary gas exchange.

Diffusion distance
The respiratory membrane is very thin, so diffusion occurs rapidly. The capillaries are so narrow that red blood cells must pass through in single file, minimizing diffusion distance and facilitating oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange.