In an average adult male, the inspiratory reserve volume is about 3100 mL, while in an average adult female it is about 1900 mL. Even more air can be inhaled if inhalation follows forced exhalation. If you inhale normally and then exhale as forcibly as possible, you can push out considerably more air beyond the 500 mL of tidal volume. The extra 1200 mL in males and 700 mL in females is the expiratory reserve volume.

The forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) is the volume of air that can be exhaled from the lungs in one second with maximal effort following a maximal inhalation. Typically, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) greatly reduces FEV1 because COPD increases airway resistance. Even after the expiratory reserve volume is exhaled, a considerable amount of air remains in the lungs because the subatmospheric intrapleural pressure keeps the alveoli slightly inflated, and some air remains in the noncollapsible airways. This volume, which cannot be measured by spirometry, is the residual volume and amounts to about 1200 mL in males and 1100 mL in females. If the thoracic cavity is opened, the intrapleural pressure rises to equal the atmospheric pressure and forces out some of the residual volume. The air remaining is called the minimal volume. Minimal volume provides a medical and legal tool for determining whether a baby is born dead (stillborn) or died after birth. The presence of minimal volume can be demonstrated by placing a piece of lung in water and observing whether it floats. Fetal lungs contain no air, so the lung of a stillborn baby will not float.

Lung capacities are combinations of specific lung volumes. Inspiratory capacity is the sum of tidal volume and inspiratory reserve volume: 500 mL + 3100 mL equals 3600 mL in males and 500 mL + 1900 mL equals 2400 mL in females. Functional residual capacity is the sum of residual volume and expiratory reserve volume: 1200 mL + 1200 mL equals 2400 mL in males and 1100 mL + 700 mL equals 1800 mL in females. Vital capacity is the sum of inspiratory reserve volume, tidal volume, and expiratory reserve volume: 4800 mL in males and 3100 mL in females. Finally, total lung capacity is the sum of vital capacity and residual volume: 6000 mL in males and 4200 mL in females.

SPORT SPOTLIGHT The 'athlete' soldier and respiratory function
Carrying a load, such as a heavy backpack, is common in many recreational activities like hiking and long-distance trekking. There are also many occupations that require personnel to carry heavy loads on the torso, including firefighters, park rangers, and Defence Force personnel. Soldiers often carry around 20 kilograms of equipment and body protection, and sometimes more than 50 kilograms as required to survive for extended durations. These loads are typically carried around the torso as a backpack and body armor. Walking or marching with this mass requires a dramatic increase in energy. Therefore, to meet the demands, the respiratory system must increase the ventilation of the alveoli to achieve adequate oxygen uptake. Therein lies the physiological conundrum. Researchers have been conducting a series of studies to quantify the impact of each breath on respiratory function and exercise performance. The load surrounding the torso makes it difficult to expand the rib cage. In a recent investigation, young healthy participants were required to carry 22 kilograms on the torso while their maximal aerobic power and exercise tolerance were measured. The team compared the effects to firstly, not carrying any load, and secondly, when carrying 22 kilograms.