An increase in breathing is followed by a two-phase decline back to the resting level. The initial decrease is due mainly to changes in neural factors that occur when movement stops or slows; the more gradual phase reflects the slower return of blood chemistry levels and temperature to baseline.

CLINICAL CONNECTION
Effects of smoking on the respiratory system. Smoking damages the movement and function of cilia in the lining of the respiratory tract, destroying cilia and making it harder to clear mucus and foreign debris. As a result, excess mucus and debris are not easily removed, which further complicates breathing. The irritants can also convert the normal respiratory epithelium into stratified squamous epithelium, which lacks cilia and goblet cells. Over time, smoking leads to destruction of elastic fibers in the lungs and is a prime cause of emphysema. These changes cause collapse of small bronchioles and trapping of air in alveoli at the end of exhalation, reducing the efficiency of gas exchange. Smoking may cause a person to become easily winded during even moderate exercise because several factors decrease respiratory efficiency in smokers: nicotine constricts terminal bronchioles, reducing airflow into and out of the lungs; carbon monoxide in smoke binds to hemoglobin, lowering its oxygen-carrying capability; irritants increase mucus secretion and swelling of the mucosal lining, which impede airflow; irritants also hinder mucociliary clearance.

CHECKPOINT 30. How does exercise affect the DRG?

23.8 Development of the respiratory system
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 23.8 Describe the development of the respiratory system.

The development of the mouth and pharynx is discussed in chapter 24. Here we consider the development of the other structures of the respiratory system that you learned about in this chapter. At about four weeks of development, the respiratory system begins as an outgrowth of the foregut just inferior to the pharynx. This outgrowth is called the respiratory diverticulum. The endoderm lining the respiratory diverticulum gives rise to the epithelium and glands of the trachea, bronchi, and alveoli. Surrounding mesoderm forms the connective tissue, cartilage, and smooth muscle of these structures. The epithelial lining of the larynx develops from the endoderm of the respiratory diverticulum; the cartilages and muscles originate from the fourth and sixth pharyngeal arches, swellings on the embryo’s surface, and these contributions shape the developing airway structures.

As the respiratory diverticulum elongates, its distal end enlarges to form a globular tracheal bud, which gives rise to the trachea. The tracheal bud soon divides into bronchial buds, which branch repeatedly and develop with the bronchi. By about 24 weeks, the lungs have formed 17 orders of branches, and respiratory bronchioles have developed. Between weeks 6 and 16, all major elements of the lungs have formed except those involved in gaseous exchange—namely, the respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveoli. Because breathing is not possible at this stage, fetuses born during this period cannot survive.

Between weeks 16 and 26, lung tissue becomes highly vascular, and respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and some primitive alveoli develop. Although a fetus born near the end of this period may survive with intensive care, death frequently occurs due to the immaturity of the respiratory and other systems.