The lungs are held within their pleural envelopes by the pleura and surrounding connective tissue, forming the root of each lung. Medially, the left lung features a concavity called the cardiac notch, accommodating the heart. Because the heart occupies more space on the left, the left lung is about 10 percent smaller than the right. The right lung is thicker and broader, but it is somewhat shorter because the right side of the diaphragm rises to accommodate the liver lying beneath it.

Surface anatomy of the lungs
The apex of the lung rises above the medial third of the clavicle and is the only part that can be palpated. The anterior, lateral, and posterior surfaces lie against the ribs. The base of the lung extends from the sixth costal cartilage anteriorly to the spinous process of the tenth thoracic vertebra posteriorly. The pleura extends about 5 cm (2 in) below the base, from the sixth costal cartilage anteriorly to the twelfth rib posteriorly. Consequently, the lungs do not completely fill the pleural cavity in this area.

Removal of excess fluid from the pleural cavity is accomplished without injuring lung tissue by inserting a needle anteriorly through the seventh intercostal space. This procedure, called thoracentesis, involves passing the needle along the superior border of the lower rib to avoid damage to the intercostal nerves and blood vessels. Inferior to the seventh intercostal space there is a danger of penetrating the diaphragm.

Clinical connection
Pneumothorax occurs when air enters the pleural cavity, causing the lung to collapse, while haemothorax refers to blood in the pleural space. In some cases, the pleural cavities may fill with air, blood, or pus, and the treatment aims to evacuate the air (or blood) from the pleural space to allow the lung to reinflate. Air in the pleural space is most commonly introduced through a surgical chest opening or as a result of trauma, such as a stab wound or gunshot. A chest tube is often necessary to facilitate evacuation.

Lobes, fissures, and lobules
One or two fissures divide each lung into lobes. Both lungs have an oblique fissure that extends inferiorly and anteriorly; the right lung also has a horizontal fissure. The oblique fissure in the left lung separates the superior lobe from the inferior lobe. In the right lung, the superior part of the oblique fissure separates the superior lobe from the inferior lobe, while the inferior part separates the inferior lobe from the middle lobe, which is bordered superiorly by the horizontal fissure. Each lobe receives its own lobar bronchus. Thus, the right main bronchus gives rise to three lobar bronchi: superior, middle, and inferior.