The external nose consists of a cartilaginous framework and a bony framework. In an anterior view, its parts are the root, which is the superior attachment of the nose to the frontal bone; the apex, the tip of the nose; the bridge, the bony framework formed by the nasal bones; and the external naris, the nostril or external opening into the nasal cavity.

Question: Which part of the nose is attached to the frontal bone?

Clinical connection: Rhinoplasty. Rhinoplasty, from rhino meaning nose and plasty meaning to mold or shape, is a surgical procedure in which the shape of the external nose is altered. Typically, both local and general anesthetics are used. Instruments are inserted through the nostrils, the nasal cartilage is reshaped, and the nasal bones are fractured and repositioned to achieve the desired shape. Although rhinoplasty is often performed for cosmetic reasons, it is sometimes done to repair a fractured nose or correct deformities. Internal packing and a splint are placed to keep the nose in the desired position as it heals.

CHECKPOINT
1. What functions do the respiratory and cardiovascular systems have in common?
2. What structural and functional features are different in the upper and lower respiratory systems? Which are the same?
3. Compare the structure and functions of the external nose and the internal nose.

Pharynx
The pharynx, or throat, is a funnel-shaped tube about 13 cm (5 in.) long that begins at the internal nares and extends to the level of the cricoid cartilage, the most inferior cartilage of the larynx. The pharynx lies just posterior to the nasal and oral cavities, superior to the larynx, and anterior to the cervical vertebrae. Its wall is composed of skeletal muscles and is lined with a mucous membrane. Relaxed skeletal muscles help keep the pharynx patent, while contraction of the muscles assists in deglutition (swallowing). The pharynx serves as a passageway for air and food, provides a resonating chamber for speech sounds, and houses the tonsils, which participate in immunological reactions against foreign invaders.

The pharynx can be divided into three anatomical regions: the nasopharynx, the oropharynx, and the laryngopharynx. The muscles of the pharynx are arranged in two layers: an outer circular layer and an inner longitudinal layer. The nasopharynx lies posterior to the nasal cavity and extends to the soft palate. The soft palate forms the posterior portion of the roof of the mouth and acts as an arch-shaped muscular partition between the nasopharynx and the oropharynx, being lined by a mucous membrane. There are openings in its wall: two internal nares and openings that lead to the auditory (pharyngotympanic) tubes, commonly known as the Eustachian tubes.