The contraction moves the inferior ribs downward and compresses the abdominal viscera, thereby forcing the diaphragm superiorly. Contraction of the internal intercostals, which extend inferiorly and posteriorly between adjacent ribs, pulls the ribs inferiorly. Although intrapleural pressure is always less than alveolar pressure, it may briefly exceed atmospheric pressure during a forceful exhalation, such as during a cough.

Other factors affecting pulmonary ventilation
As you have just learned, air pressure differences drive airflow during inhalation and exhalation. However, three other factors affect the rate of airflow and the ease of pulmonary ventilation: surface tension of the alveolar fluid, compliance of the lungs, and airway resistance.

Surface tension of alveolar fluid
As noted earlier, a thin layer of alveolar fluid coats the luminal surface of alveoli and exerts a force known as surface tension. Surface tension arises at all air-water interfaces because the polar water molecules are more strongly attracted to each other than they are to gas molecules in the air. When liquid surrounds a sphere of air, as in an alveolus or a soap bubble, surface tension produces an inwardly directed force. Soap bubbles burst because they collapse inward due to surface tension. In the lungs, surface tension causes the alveoli to assume the smallest possible diameter. During breathing, surface tension must be overcome to expand the lungs during each inhalation. Surface tension also accounts for two-thirds of lung elastic recoil, which decreases the size of alveoli during exhalation. The surfactant (a mixture of phospholipids and lipoproteins) present in alveolar fluid reduces its surface tension below the surface tension of pure water. A deficiency of surfactant in premature infants causes respiratory distress syndrome, in which the surface tension of alveolar fluid is greatly increased, so that many alveoli collapse at the end of each exhalation. Great effort is then needed at the next inhalation to reopen the collapsed alveoli.

Compliance of the lungs
Compliance refers to how much effort is required to stretch the lungs and chest wall. High compliance means that the lungs and chest wall expand easily; low compliance means that they resist expansion. By analogy, a thin balloon that is easy to inflate has high compliance, and a heavy and stiff balloon that takes a lot of effort to inflate has low compliance. In the lungs, compliance is related to two principal factors: elasticity and surface tension. The lungs normally have high compliance and expand easily because elastic fibres in lung tissue are easily stretched and surfactant in alveolar fluid reduces surface tension. Decreased compliance is a common feature in pulmonary conditions that (1) scar lung tissue (for example, tuberculosis), (2) cause lung tissue to become filled with fluid (pulmonary oedema), (3) produce a deficiency in surfactant, or (4) impede lung expansion in any way (for example, paralysis of the intercostal muscles). Nevertheless, increased lung compliance occurs in emphysema (see “Disorders: Homeostatic imbalances” at the end of the chapter) due to destruction of elastic fibres in alveolar walls and therefore poor elastic recoil.

CLINICAL CONNECTION
Tuberculosis and airflow obstruction: importance of treatment
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) involves a slow, progressive destruction of lung tissue and inherent obstruction of airflow through the lower conducting airways. Cigarette smoking is a known risk factor for the development of COPD but other environmental and occupational particles can also contribute to the development of the disease. For individuals who develop a progressive decline in lung function, simple activities of daily living become impossible to achieve as supply of oxygen to the body's tissues becomes limited. In t